\# Public Finance

| Year | Debt Nominal GDP ($ Billions) | GDP     | Deficit | Interest | i     |
| ---- | ----------------------------- | ------- | ------- | -------- | ----- |
| 0    | $5,000                        | $10,000 | 50.0%   | $500.00  | 2.50% |
| 1    | $5,500                        | $10,500 | 52.4%   | $525.00  | 2.62% |
| 2    | $6,025                        | $11,025 | 54.6%   | $551.25  | 2.73% |
| •    |                               |         |         |          |       |
| •    |                               |         |         |          |       |
| •    |                               |         |         |          |       |

Long run: 100.0% 5.00% \*Money in billions. (5% of $5,000), so interest as a percentage of GDP (i) is 2.50%; in year 1 interest is $275 (5% of $5,500), so interest as a percentage of GDP (i) is 2.62%; and so on. Note that in every year i rb (in year 0, i 5% 50% 2.50%; in year 1, i 5% 52.4% 2.62%). In the long run, interest as a percentage of GDP (i) is given by the simple formula: i\* = rb\* r(f/g) where r is the interest rate on government bonds. In this example with r = 5%, f = 5%, and g = 5%, interest as a percentage of GDP (i) would eventually be 5% of GDP. If tax revenue were 20% of GDP, then 25% of tax revenue (5% out of 20%) would have to be devoted to paying interest to bondholders, leaving only 75% of tax revenue available to finance government programs. By contrast, if the deficit as a percentage of GDP (f) were only 2% of GDP, then from the formula b\* = f/g, eventually b\* would be 40% and i\* = rb\* would be 2% of GDP. If tax revenue were 20% of GDP, then only 10% of tax revenue (2% out of 20%) would have to be devoted to paying interest to bondholders, leaving 90% of tax revenue available to finance government programs. # Inflation, Debt, and Deficits Suppose a debtor—household, business, or government—owes a creditor $100. If inflation—a rise in the prices of goods and services in the economy—occurs, then when the debtor pays the creditor $100, the debtor is giving up less real goods and services than if there had been no inflation during the period of the loan. Thus, a debtor who owes a fixed dollar amount to a creditor enjoys a real gain when inflation occurs, and the creditor suffers a real loss. Inflation reduces the real (inflation-adjusted) value of a given nominal dollar debt. Suppose at the beginning of this year, government debt held by the public is $100 billion—the government is obligated to pay bondholders $100 billion in cash when the bonds reach maturity. Assume that there is 10% inflation during the year. At the end of the year, the $100 billion that the government owes bondholders can buy the same real goods and services that could have been bought with $91 billion at the beginning of the year ($100/1.1 = $91). The 10% inflation has reduced the real (inflation-adjusted) value of the debt from $100 billion to $91 billion. At the time the loan was made, both debtor and creditor may have anticipated inflation and agreed on a higher interest rate to compensate for it. It remains true that inflation reduces the real value of the dollar debt.