\# Chapter 11 Education from the state government, which raises its revenue mainly from sales and/or income taxes. However, it is useful to begin our analysis by asking the question: What would happen if the government played no role in schooling? # Private Schools without Government We begin with the extreme case of absolutely no government role in education: no operation of any school, no financial aid for any children, no regulation of schools or the admissions process, and no requirement that parents send their children to school. Because many parents would be willing to pay for schooling, private schools would spring up. Each school would charge a price—a “tuition”—that covers its cost. Competition among schools would keep price close to cost. Some schools would be high quality, charging high tuition to cover their high cost, while others would be low quality, charging low tuition to cover their low cost. Private schools would compete for parents by trying to provide a given quality for the lowest possible cost and tuition (equivalently, trying to maximize quality for a given cost and tuition). Each school would feel pressure to perform well or face an exit by paying consumers. There would be substantial variation in school quality among children. Poor families would have difficulty affording even a low-tuition, low-quality school, while most affluent families would send their children to a high-tuition, high-quality school. There would also be quality variation due to variation in parental priorities about education; at any income level, some parents would buy more quality for their children than others. Some parents would buy no schooling at all for their children, preferring to spend their money on other things; their uneducated children may grow up to burden others in society by committing crimes or going on welfare. An educational separation process would emerge. In selecting a school, many (but not all) parents would be interested in the socioeconomic characteristics of other children in the school. Many high-income parents would want their children to go to school mainly with other high-income children for both educational and social reasons. In response to this preference, schools trying to attract high-income children would have an incentive to try to limit admissions of low-income children. The main instruments for achieving this would be to charge high tuition, locate in high-income communities, and use an admissions process to screen applicants. If many high-income families succeeded in sending their children to mainly high-income schools, then most middle-income families would have to settle for mainly middle-income schools, leaving most low-income children to attend mainly low-income schools. The separation process would be governed by more than income. In selecting a school, some parents would also consider the race, ethnicity, and religion of other children in the school. The school admissions process would be similar to the one currently used by colleges and private elementary and secondary schools. Children would be subject to entrance exams and rejections. There would be no guarantee that neighborhood friends would be able to attend the same school. Children with special educational needs or problems would be charged high tuition to cover their high cost, or schools would avoid admitting them. Many schools would discriminate in admissions on the basis of family income, and in response to the preference of some parents, some schools would discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, or religion. # Private Schools with Vouchers from Government Now let’s consider what would happen if government does not operate any public schools but does intervene in education through regulation and student financial aid.