\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance Economics cannot declare a particular degree of redistribution to be optimal, deficient, or excessive. # Limitation of Price and Supply by the Insurer In Figure 6.1, the suppliers of medical care—doctors, hospitals, medical technology firms, drug companies—are assumed to respond freely to any clockwise rotation of the demand curve caused by insurance, so that the market would go to the intersection of supply and demand. With no insurance, the quantity and price of medical care would be at point O (100, $100); with 75% insurance, at point F (110, $200); and with 100% insurance, at point G (120, $300) but with the price continuing to rise above $300, as explained above. If insurance is 100% so that patients pay 0%, the insurer—the government or a private insurance company—would not want to let the suppliers go freely up their supply curve to point G and then continue straight up without any stopping point. If the suppliers move freely up to point G, the insurer must pay the suppliers an amount E P Q $300 120 $36,000; when suppliers continue to raise their price above $300, the insurer’s expenditure will rise above $36,000. The insurer will surely try to prevent this from happening. But how? The insurer can refuse to pay a price greater than P\*—for example, $100 (the price that would have occurred in the market with no insurance at point O). What happens if the insurer limits the price to P\* $100? As shown in Figure 6.3, with P $100, the suppliers will supply only Q 100, and they will receive only the amount E P Q $100 100 $10,000. With 100% insurance, the patient pays 0% so demand is 120. The result is a shortage—excess demand—of 20 units of medical care. Rather than being simply turned down, patients will probably be put on a waiting list for the 20 units, so in Figure 6.3, the waiting list is 20. As also shown in Figure 6.3, the magnitude of excess demand can be reduced if insurance switches from 100% to 75%, so that the demand curve is D instead of D. With 75% insurance, patients must pay 25%, and at P $100, patient demand is 115, not 120; the shortage (excess demand) is 15, not 20 (the waiting list is 15, not 20). Thus, the insurer may provide 100% insurance, but if so, the insurer won’t allow the suppliers to respond freely to patient demand—to climb up their supply curve until the vertical patient demand curve D is reached and then continue to raise P. The insurer will find a way to limit the supply. One way is to limit the price the insurer will pay suppliers. It is sometimes asked how in a country like Britain, where medical care is free to the patient and where the government, who is the insurer, pays 100%, so much less is spent on medical care than in a country like the United States, where the patient often pays a percentage of the bill. In Britain, health spending is only 8% of GDP, while it is 16% in the United States. The answer can be seen in Figure 6.3. The numbers in Figure 6.3 are not the actual numbers in Britain or the United States, but the numerical example in the figure illustrates why expenditure in Britain is smaller than in the United States despite Britain’s “free care.” In Britain, the patient demand curve is the vertical D, but the government limits price to $100 and quantity to 100, so expenditure is only $10,000 and the waiting list is 20. In the United States, patient demand is D (because patients pay 25%), there is no price limit, and insurance companies allow the suppliers to satisfy patient demand by moving up their supply curve to point F where P $200 and Q 110. There is no waiting list, and expenditure E P Q $200 110 $22,000 (insurers bear 75% of the burden, $16,500, and patients bear 25% of the burden, $5,500).