\# Chapter 13 Government Borrowing Automatically tax revenue falls because a recession reduces the output produced and income earned and, therefore, the tax revenue collected. With tax revenue down, the government borrows to keep spending from falling, and the budget goes into deficit. What would happen if the government were forced to adhere to an always balanced budget rule? The government would promptly have to either cut spending or raise taxes. Consider the impact of each fiscal action on the economy. If the government cuts its purchases, firms supplying goods to the government—planes for the military, computers for public schools—would cut output and employment, making the recession worse. If the government cuts its cash transfer spending—Social Security or welfare benefits—the recipients would reduce their consumption, making the recession worse. If the government raises taxes, taxpayers would reduce their consumption, making the recession worse. No matter how the government balances its budget, its action would make the recession worse. Economists are virtually unanimous in agreeing that a rule that requires prompt budget balancing in the middle of a recession is dangerous, because it would make a recession worse. Does this mean that any balanced budget rule would be dangerous? No. For more than half a century, most economists have advocated a particular kind of balanced budget rule that would not make a recession worse. It has been called the full employment balanced budget rule (FEBAR). One practical problem with FEBAR is that there is disagreement about what constitutes full employment. Another is that actual employment often turns out to be less than full employment. To avoid these two problems, we replace “full employment” with “normal unemployment” and call the rule normal unemployment balanced budget rule (NUBAR). Normal unemployment is defined as the average unemployment rate during the past decade. There is little disagreement about the average unemployment rate over the past decade, and the actual unemployment rate on average equals the average unemployment rate. # A Normal Unemployment Balanced Budget Rule Under a normal unemployment balanced budget rule (NUBAR), each year Congress must enact a planned budget for the coming fiscal year that technicians estimate would be balanced if next year the unemployment rate is normal (the average of the preceding decade). The technicians should probably be the staff of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) which already performs similar tasks for Congress. Given the tax rates Congress has set, the technicians estimate how much revenue would be collected next year if the unemployment rate is normal. Given the features of the spending programs that Congress has enacted, the technicians estimate how much would be spent next year if the unemployment rate is normal. If the estimate of spending roughly equals the estimate of revenue, then the technicians would pronounce Congress’ planned budget to be in compliance with NUBAR. If the estimate of spending exceeds the estimate of revenue, the technicians would pronounce Congress’ planned budget to be in violation of NUBAR, and Congress would be required to amend its planned budget until the technicians pronounce it to be in compliance. NUBAR would avoid making a recession worse because it applies to this year’s planned budget for next year, not this year’s actual spending and revenue. Suppose the economy drops into recession and NUBAR is in effect. Congress is not required to immediately cut spending or raise taxes in the recession, because NUBAR applies to the planned budget, not current spending and revenue. At the same time, NUBAR would exert desirable discipline on politicians at the time they enact the planned budget for the coming year. Under NUBAR, they can only