\# Glossary # A **ability to pay** The capacity of taxpayers to pay a tax. **actuarially fair premium** A health insurance premium that just covers the expected cost of enrollees. **adjusted gross income (AGI)** A household’s total income minus adjustments. **adverse selection** When people have accurate “inside information” about their health prospects, it results in a bias (towards higher medical cost) in the mix of people who decide to buy insurance. **agglomeration economies** The gains in efficiency that come from having many firms and workers close to one another. **allocative efficiency** When producers allocate the optimal quantity of resources to the production of good X versus good Y. **alternative minimum tax (AMT)** A tax that replaces the regular income tax for a subset of high-income households. The intent is to make every high-income household pay at least a minimum amount of tax even if that household would owe little or no regular income tax. **altruistic** Willing to contribute to help others. **annuity** A payment made monthly for as long as the retiree lives. **assessed value** The value assigned by local government to each residential and business property. **assessment ratio** The ratio of assessed property value to market value. **assets** Items of value owned. **average indexed monthly earnings (AIME)** A concept used by the Social Security Administration to calculate a person’s monthly benefit. It is the average of a person’s adjusted annual wage incomes divided by twelve to put it on a monthly basis. **average tax rate (ATR)** The ratio of total taxes paid to total income earned. # B **bequest** A person’s estate (wealth) that is given to heirs upon the person’s death. **bureaucrats** Government officials who administer bureaus (government departments in charge of particular programs). # C **cap and trade** A permit method to allocate pollution where a cap is set on the total quantity of permits for a pollutant, and firms that initially obtain permits are allowed to trade them so there is an active secondary market in permits. **capital gain** An increase in the value of an asset. **capitalization** The effect on home prices of the desirability of the service-tax mix provided by the local government. **capitalized** Built into the price of the home. **catastrophic insurance** A type of health insurance where the insurance company will pay the entire medical bill above a high threshold. **categorical matching grant** A grant that gives the lower level of government funds only as a match for its own funds spent on a specified activity. **circuit breakers** A refund to partially reimburse the taxpayer for a local property tax that is high relative to the taxpayer’s income. **closed-ended categorical matching grant** A grant with a ceiling (limit). Once the ceiling is reached, there is no further matching by the grantor. **coinsurance rate** The percentage of a medical bill that the patient is required to pay. Also called the cost-sharing rate. **command and control** A method of allocating pollution by commanding each polluter to emit a certain amount of pollutant or by controlling the production technology that firms can use. **compensating differential** The difference between the pay of two jobs due to the difference in the risk of on-the-job injury or death.