\# 180 Public Finance but it might still be preferred by citizens because they regard it as a fairer or a more administratively feasible tax. Efficiency is only one criterion for judging taxes, but it is an important one. # The Efficiency Loss from a Tax on a Good In Figure 7.8, a $4 tax on a good has resulted in 100 units being produced and consumed; consumers pay $20 per unit and producers keep $16 per unit. Assume that the good has no externality (negative or positive). Then it’s wasteful—inefficient—that the 101st unit was not produced and consumed. Why? Because the marginal benefit (MB) to the consumer of the 101st unit—the maximum amount that the consumer would be willing to pay for that unit (thereby keeping his utility constant)—equals the height of the D curve (the height of point B, $20), while the marginal cost (MC) equals the height of the S curve (the height of point A, $16). The MB would have exceeded the MC, and the net gain to society would have been BA, $4. It’s also wasteful that the 102nd unit wasn’t produced because MB would still have exceeded MC, and so on until the 110th unit where MB finally equals MC.4 The sum of the net gains that could have occurred by increasing the quantity of the good from 100 to 110 equals the area of the shaded triangle: ½(base × height) = ½($4 × 10) = $20. The (vertical) base of the triangle equals the tax per unit T, and the (horizontal) height equals the change in quantity, ΔQ. The triangle shows the net loss in society’s welfare due to the tax: **Efficiency loss = area of triangle = ½T(ΔQ)** It is clearly appropriate that the triangle is labeled BAD. We noted above that one equivalent term for the efficiency loss from a tax is the excess burden of a tax. Now we can explain why. The direct burden of the tax is the tax revenue paid by the private sector to the government. Since the tax per unit is $4, and the number of units is 100, tax revenue equals $4 × 100 = $400; tax revenue equals **4** A technical point: The MB curve in Figure 7.8 is the compensated demand curve as explained in the appendix to Chapter 6. # FIGURE 7.8 The Efficiency Loss from a Product Tax The efficiency loss equals the triangle’s area.

| $20 | B | S(MC) |
| --- | - | ----- |
| $4  | D |       |
| $16 | A |       |
| 100 |   | 110   |
| Q   |   |       |
