\# Public Finance Suppose the legislature has voted $10 million to fund a list of local projects. Now a bill is being drafted with a list of local projects that will receive the funding. Legislators are logrolling with each other—each says, “I promise to vote for the project in your district if you vote for the project in my district.” Suppose that most of the projects have only a small positive value to local residents—specifically, local residents would not have been willing to pay taxes to fund the projects. Then the logrolling certainly seems wasteful, with each legislator striving to get a pork-barrel project funded in his district by vote trading with other legislators who have the same objective—a project that the district’s voters would not have been willing to fund with their own taxes. The real problem here is not the logrolling over particular projects, but the voting of $10 million by the legislature in the first place. Once the pot of $10 million has been made available, then each legislator views it as “free” money—why not try to get some of it for his own district? If local projects have primarily local benefits, then they should be funded locally, not nationally, so that local taxpayers have to weigh the cost of paying local taxes against the benefit of the project. It should be noted that local pork-barrel projects funded by a pot of federal money are only a small fraction of government spending. Stopping pork-barrel spending would not get most government spending “under control” because most government spending is social insurance (federal), defense (federal), and education (state and local). However, pork-barrel spending is nevertheless worth curtailing. # Lobbying, Special Interests, Campaigns, Bureaucracies, and Corruption Imagine a complete ban on lobbying—communication from citizens or groups to legislators about their reasons for supporting or opposing a proposed bill. How would legislators become informed about problems that need to be addressed or about the pros and cons of past or proposed legislation? Surely any attempt to completely prevent such communication would be undesirable and impractical. Nevertheless, there is a concern about certain kinds of lobbying. Consider an example: Domestic business firms producing clothing seek a tariff on imports of clothing that would compete with their own domestic sale of clothing. A tariff would raise the price of clothing and give a large boost to the domestic firms’ revenues and, therefore, to the incomes of their workers, managers, and stockholders. Private special interests engage in rent seeking—to use government to obtain higher returns than they could otherwise achieve. Why don’t consumers lobby against the tariff on imports of clothing? Because the tariff would have only a small impact on the typical consumer who devotes only a small percentage of his budget to clothing. Each consumer is hurt only slightly, so it is not worth it for any consumer to spend money lobbying against the tariff—in fact, it is not worth it for any consumer to even pay attention. Besides, consumers face a free-rider problem. Lobbying against the tariff is a public good. If it succeeds, all consumers of the product benefit whether they contributed to the lobbying effort or not. Therefore, lobbying against the tariff receives little funding. By contrast, it is worth it for domestic firms in the clothing industry to spend a lot of money lobbying for the tariff because the tariff will cause a significant boost in their revenues. Thus, narrow special interests raise a lot of money to lobby for legislation that benefits them, but broad general interests raise little money to counter it. Legislators need funds to run for reelection. Special interests are able and willing to offer funds to legislators who vote for their special interest legislation, while the general public offers little funding to legislators who resist. Thus, there is an imbalance.