\# Chapter 5 Social Security The move to the right in the first row can be viewed as providing insurance against the possibility that a person’s own children will be unable or unwilling to support that person in old age. A person who regards it as risky to depend on his own children might find the move to the right in the table appealing. There is another feature of collective rather than individual support that may be an advantage or disadvantage, depending on your philosophy. Under the collective Social Security system, the legislature (with executive approval) decides the formula for how much tax each worker pays and how much benefit each retiree receives. For example, if worker H earns three times as much as worker L, will H pay three times as much, more than three times as much, or less than three times as much tax as L? And when they retire, will H receive three times, more than three times, or less than three times the benefit that L receives? The legislature could, for example, choose formulas that achieve a partial redistribution from high- to low-wage workers, so that H pays three times the tax that L pays but receives twice (not three times) the benefit that L receives. Such partial redistribution characterizes the formula chosen by Congress for the U.S. Social Security system. There are some disadvantages to workers collectively supporting retirees. First, it must be a compulsory system to work effectively and fairly—compulsory taxes must be levied—and any compulsion is always somewhat regrettable. Compulsion is necessary because if the collective system instead relied on voluntary contributions from workers, many workers would naturally prefer to give to their own parents rather than the collective fund. Also, it would be impossible to promise a particular benefit to retirees because the benefit would depend on what workers felt like giving each year. Second, the collective system is impersonal. Instead of support from children to their own parents, there are tax payments and benefit checks among strangers. Under the U.S. Social Security system, workers are of course free to ask employers to attach personal notes to their parents with their payroll taxes, but even if employers agree, Congress has not authorized the inclusion of workers’ personal notes in benefit checks to their parents. Of course, workers are free to try to convince their own parents that their benefit checks are coming from their own children’s payroll taxes. # Each Generation Self-Sufficient Now let’s turn to the second row of Table 5.1, “Each generation self-sufficient”; in the first column, “Individually,” the entry is “Recent.” In more recent times (the past few decades), there has been an attempt by more workers to save for their own retirement so that they would not be dependent on the next generation when they get old—either individually (their own children) or collectively (the U.S. Social Security system). Under this way, workers can put their saving in the bank or buy government bonds, corporate bonds, or corporate stocks. The saving will earn interest, dividends, or capital gains (e.g., if they buy corporate stock and its price goes up over time). When they retire, they will gradually draw down their bank account or sell their bonds or stocks and use the cash to finance their consumption. It is important to mention another way individuals can save. They can buy a home, financed mostly by borrowing from a bank (a mortgage), but then gradually pay off the loan; these gradual payments are saving—uses of income not for consumption, but to gradually get out of debt. By retirement, they may succeed in owning the home and no longer having any debt. They can then sell the home, move into a more modest rental apartment, and finance their consumption (including rent) by gradually drawing down the proceeds from the home sale. So instead of building up wealth for retirement in the