\# Chapter 10 State and Local Public Finance with residents who have a strong preference for local public services would be willing to set relatively high taxes on residents to provide those services; a community whose residents have a weak preference for local public services would not. Each potential resident could then choose the community she prefers. On the other hand, business firms do benefit from some local public services. For example, think of police and fire protection. It might indeed be harmful if firms that benefit from police and fire protection were not charged their share of the cost of providing those services. To summarize: The Tiebout process implies that there is an advantage to letting local governments provide differing packages of public services and taxes. Through the Tiebout process, local governments engage in a marketlike competition for potential residents that benefits most households in society. Thus, if people had similar incomes, it would usually be best to let many public goods be provided by local governments, so that a variety can be offered across communities, and individuals can locate themselves in communities that best satisfy their individual preferences for particular public goods. # State Government for Local Externalities or Scale Economies State government has a role to play when there are externalities or scale economies. Despite the Tiebout process, competition among local governments would not produce optimal outcomes in two cases: first, when there are externalities, and second, when there are economies of scale. In these cases, the state government can improve outcomes by intervening in either of two ways: first, by providing the service itself, or second, by giving a categorical matching grant to local governments. # Externalities It is optimal to let each town government maintain neighborhood streets, but not optimal to let each town maintain its section of a major road that carries traffic through several localities. If one town fails to maintain its section, it imposes a cost on all the others. Similarly, it is optimal to let each town government maintain a small neighborhood park that is used primarily by town residents, but not optimal to expect one town to adequately maintain a large park that is used by many people who live outside the town (assuming it is unfeasible to charge user fees to the outsiders). Maintenance of a major road that carries traffic through several localities within a state should be made the responsibility of state or county government. So should maintenance of a large park or woods. # Scale Economies Is it optimal for each local government to have its own university? No. There may be certain programs—science labs, athletic facilities, orchestras, and bands—where it is better to have a single university serving the residents of many towns. Is it optimal for each small town to have its own public hospital? No. Expensive technology would sit idle much of the time if each town’s hospital were equipped to handle all kinds of medical problems. The state government or county government, not the government of a small town, should provide a large public hospital. # Categorical Matching Grants to Local Governments A categorical matching grant may be optimal when there is a positive externality. Under a categorical matching grant, the city gets state funds only as a match for its own funds targeted for a particular service. Consider a sewage treatment plant that benefits residents of a particular locality but also residents of surrounding localities. Suppose it is estimated that for the typical sewage treatment plant the benefit to outsiders