\# Public Finance on the job. Economists say that students at school are accumulating human capital—skills and knowledge that will raise their economic productivity (just as physical capital, like machinery, raises their economic productivity). Schooling is an investment: Time is spent today not on producing goods but in accumulating skills and knowledge that will enable a higher production of goods in the future. # Work Ethic Schools teach students how to be responsible workers. School requires students to show up on time every day and complete assignments on time. It teaches students how to receive instructions for an assignment, work at the assigned task, and turn in a completed project or how to demonstrate learning by a certain date through performance on a test. This is similar to the process employers will require. # How to Learn Schools teach students how to learn. Students learn how to study, memorize, think analytically, and formulate questions and criticisms. When a student is faced with a new subject on the job, the skill and experience of how to learn (acquired and practiced in school) raises productivity on the job. # How to Enjoy Learning Throughout life, learning can provide satisfaction and pleasure. A course taught by an inspiring teacher can teach students how to enjoy learning for its own sake. # Screening and Sorting Schools screen and sort students for employers. An important function of schools is to produce a track record on each student. Schools assign students academic tasks, grade their performance, and keep a record. Consequently, this provides employers with useful information on which to base hiring decisions. Suppose instead that employers had no information on job applicants. There would be an enormous waste of time throughout the economy in hiring, trial periods on the job, initial training, and firing of workers. Schools enable students to signal their qualifications to employers through their performance and therefore provide benefits that accrue to individual students. Screening and sorting by schools greatly improve the efficient allocation of labor to employers in the economy. # Citizenship Schools teach how our democratic system works and the role that citizens are expected to play to make it function well. It may be hoped, for example, that learning history and political science will make citizens alert to attempts of a potential dictator to seize power. The alertness of each citizen benefits other citizens. # Reducing the Number of Criminals Schools provide skills, work ethic, and track records that enable individuals to obtain and maintain productive jobs. Schools therefore reduce the number of individuals who resort to crime. This reduction in crime benefits other citizens. # ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION Most children in the United States receive their elementary and secondary (K–12) education at local public schools that are financed by local property taxes and by grants.