\# Chapter 9 Consumption Taxes the effect of the taxes on the investment good that were levied at the early stages of its production. Under a RST, imported consumer goods are taxed at the same rate as domestically produced consumer goods in order to prevent imports from having an improper advantage. For the same reason, imports would be subject to the same VAT rate as domestically produced goods. Under a retail sales tax, exported goods are not taxed—only domestic retail sales to domestic consumers are taxed. The same exclusion of exports from tax would be achieved by a VAT. Sales revenue from goods that are exported would be omitted from sales revenue S in either formula above used to compute the tax. True, a VAT would be levied on the early stages of domestic production of an exported good. However, the business firm that exports the good would reduce the total VAT it owes by omitting it from sales revenue S, thereby undoing the effect of the taxes on the export good that was levied at the early stages of its production. Based on this analysis, most economists reach this conclusion: A VAT is equivalent to a RST. Since the RST is a consumption tax, the VAT is a consumption tax: A consumer bears a burden from either a RST or a VAT according to his consumption spending. Because economic analysis suggests that a VAT is equivalent to a RST, it follows that a VAT is regressive with respect to income, just like a RST: As we move from low- to high-income households (in a given year), the ratio of tax burden to income generally falls. The reason is that as we move from low- to high-income households, the ratio of household consumption to household income generally falls because higher-income people usually save a larger fraction of their income than low-income people do. # Exemptions Under a RST or a VAT A major issue for any RST or VAT is whether to exempt any categories of consumer goods and services (or tax certain categories at a lower rate). There are two arguments for exemptions. One argument is that fairness calls for exempting (or setting a lower rate on) goods like foods and medicines because these are “involuntary necessities,” not “voluntary luxuries” like many other goods and services. Note that this argument could be made even if all consumers had the same income. Second, exemptions can reduce the regressivity of a RST or a VAT. If low-income households spend a higher percentage of their income on goods in category X than do high-income households, then exempting category X reduces regressivity. Exempting food and medicines would reduce regressivity. There are three arguments against exemptions. First, if there are no exemptions, then the tax base would be as broad as possible, and a given target revenue would be raised with the lowest possible tax rate; a lower tax rate usually results in a lower efficiency loss from a tax (as we discussed in Chapter 7). Second, there is an administrative cost for retailers and tax auditors when goods must be separated into categories at the cash register so that some are taxed while others are exempt. Third, exemptions are not well targeted; for example, a food exemption forgoes revenue from the rich as well as the poor. Exemptions of particular consumer goods can be achieved under a VAT. True, a VAT would be levied on the early stages of domestic production of a particular consumer good. However, the retailer that sells the particular consumer good to a consumer would reduce the total VAT that it owes by omitting it from sales revenue, thereby undoing the effect of the taxes on the consumer good that was levied at the early stages of its production.