\# 284 Public Finance # A District Power Equalizing Plan Some states implement a district power equalizing plan, also called a guaranteed tax base plan. Under this plan, the state designates a target property per pupil (a target tax base) and gives a grant to any district with property per pupil less than the target. Specifically, it gives each district the difference between the tax revenue that the district actually raises and the revenue it would have raised if it had the target amount of property per pupil (the target tax base). It is as though the state brings the district’s tax base up to the target (the “guaranteed” level). Note that the greater the property tax rate that the district sets, the larger its state grant, so this plan should encourage local tax effort and spending. # A Variable Matching Grant Plan Although a variable matching grant plan has seldom been implemented, it deserves serious consideration. Under a variable matching grant plan, the matching rate would be highest for low-income districts and would phase down sharply as income per pupil rises. For example, the state might give $20 for every $10 a low-income district raises itself (a matching rate of 2), $10 for every $10 a middle-income district raises (m = 1), and $1 for every $10 a high-income district raises (m = 0.1). Each school district would know its matching rate when it chooses its local school tax rate. By giving a low-income district a much higher matching rate than a high-income district, the variable matching grant program should narrow the quality gap between high- and low-income school districts. A matching grant reduces the “price” of education to the local school district. With the grant, the low-income district can obtain $30 of education for $10, so its price is 33% ($10/$30); the middle-income district can obtain $20 of education for $10, so its price is 50% ($10/$20); and the high-income district can obtain $11 of education for $10, so its price is 91% ($10/$11). Hence, the grant program cuts the price 67% for the low-income district, 50% for the middle-income district, and 9% for the high-income district. District’s price = 1/(1 + m) District’s price cut = m/(1 + m) For example, the low-income district’s price equals 1/(1 + 2) = 33%, and its price cut equals 2/(1 + 2) = 67%. Table 11.1 shows the price and price cut for the three districts. If the state matching rate m for the low-income district is set very high so that the price for the low-income district is set near 0%, then the low-income district is likely to choose to increase its spending a lot. Conversely, if the m for the high-income district is set very low (near zero) so that the price for the high-income district is set near 100%, then the high-income district is likely to choose to increase its spending only a little. Thus, the gap between districts in total expenditure (local plus state) per pupil—and therefore in school quality per pupil—should narrow.

| District’s Income | State Matching Rate m | District’s Price | District’s Price Cut |     |
| ----------------- | --------------------- | ---------------- | -------------------- | --- |
|                   | Low                   | 2.0              | 33%                  | 67% |
|                   | Middle                | 1.0              | 50                   | 50  |
| High              | 0.1                   | 91               | 9                    |     |
