\# Public Finance # An Employer Mandate or an Employer Play-or-Pay Option Since the majority of working Americans are covered by employer-provided health insurance, why not require all employers to provide insurance to all employees? An employer mandate has been a central element of health insurance proposals by four presidents: Nixon, Ford, Carter, and Clinton. In the early 1970s, Republican Presidents Nixon and Ford proposed an employer mandate as an alternative to the liberal Democrat proposal for universal government insurance. In the context of that period, their proposal was deemed relatively conservative because it relied on private insurance rather than government insurance. By the end of the 1970s, Democratic President Carter had been persuaded to support the employer mandate. By this time many conservatives were becoming wary of putting a requirement on private employers. In the 1980s, Republican Presidents Reagan and Bush opposed an employer mandate as an unacceptable imposition by government on private firms, and most conservatives opposed Democratic President Clinton’s proposal for an employer mandate. Today, most conservatives, including President Bush, oppose an employer mandate. One problem with an employer mandate has always been its application to small businesses with mostly low-wage employees. Representatives of these businesses contend that they cannot afford health insurance; they say that, unlike businesses with high-wage workers, low-wage workers can’t afford to accept lower wages to enable businesses to afford insurance. Also, if a small business has just a few employees with high-cost medical problems, then the insurance company may charge the company a high premium. Consequently, advocates of an employer mandate usually recommend subsidies to small businesses with low-wage employees to help those businesses afford insurance and comply with the mandate. Representatives of small businesses, however, are usually skeptical whether the subsidies will prove adequate. Instead of requiring employers to provide insurance for their employees, the government might offer each employer the option of play-or-pay. Under play-or-pay, the employer must either “play”—provide health insurance—or “pay” a tax that would help finance government efforts to cover the uninsured. # Government Reinsurance The premium charged by a private insurer must be high enough to cover the costs incurred by the minority of patients with huge medical bills. Suppose the government makes a commitment to reimburse any private insurer X% of the amount by which a patient’s medical bill exceeds a high threshold. This commitment would reduce the expected financial burden that the private insurer must bear, and competition among private insurers would reduce the premium they charge enrollees; lower premiums would make private insurance more affordable to more employers and individuals. A government commitment to reimburse private insurers for X% of the amount by which a patient’s medical bill exceeds a high threshold is called government reinsurance of the private insurance firms. Of course, the government would have to increase taxes to obtain the revenue needed to reimburse private insurance firms X%, so government reinsurance would reduce premiums but raise taxes. Note that the numerical value of X% must be set significantly less than 100%, so that each private insurer retains a strong incentive to try to limit the patient’s huge medical bill by monitoring the services and prices charged by hospitals and doctors to the patient.5 5 Katherine Swartz, *Reinsuring Health: Why More Middle-Class People Are Uninsured and What Government Can Do* (Russell Sage, 2006).