\# Chapter 1 # Introduction to Public Finance to obtain necessary medical care and live above poverty, government intervention would be necessary. Although the free market has certain problems, so does government. The analysis of how government should and actually does make decisions concerning goods and services is called political economy. A choice must be made about which level of government—federal, state, or local—should intervene. Cost-benefit analysis should be used to guide government decisions. Although government borrowing sometimes is warranted, the commonsense concern about excessive borrowing applies to a government just as it does to households and business firms. Several interesting facts and numbers concerning taxation and government spending should be kept in mind. Tax revenue as a percent of GDP is 30% in the United States, 40% on average in economically advanced countries (OECD), and 50% in Scandinavia. In the United States, federal tax revenue as a percent of GDP is 20%, while state and local tax revenue is 10%. The Big Three social insurance programs—Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security—together are projected to increase from 10% of GDP in 2010 to 16% of GDP in 2040. Roughly 45% of federal revenue comes from personal income tax, while roughly 35% comes from payroll (FICA) tax and 10% from corporate income tax. State revenue comes mainly from sales tax and income tax; local revenue, from property tax. Borrowing during World War II drove federal debt above 100% of GDP; in the three decades after the war from the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s, federal debt as a percentage of GDP gradually declined to 25%; over the next two decades it rose gradually to 50% and then declined to about 35% by 2000 where it remains today.