\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance European countries. The Canadian government provides health insurance to everyone (implemented through its provincial governments with financial assistance from the national government)—its system was established in the early 1970s. Medical care is free to patients and financed by taxation. The government pays the fees charged by physicians and hospitals. In contrast to Britain, hospitals and physicians remain in the private sector, and physicians are generally paid a fee for service rather than by salary or capitation. But there is substantial government regulation of physician fee schedules and hospital rates, budgets, and operations. Thus, in contrast to Britain, the Canadian government does not run and operate a national health service. It is the single payer of the fees charged by medical providers, and it imposes substantial regulation on the private health sector. Hence, the Canadian system is sometimes referred to as a single-payer system. Through its regulation, the government limits supply, and with medical care free to patients, demand often exceeds supply. Therefore, there is substantial rationing of nonemergency medical services, evidenced in wait lists and in the fact that some wait-listed Canadians seek and obtain elective surgery in the United States. The degree of rationing is determined by the level of taxes and the degree to which regulation limits supply. As countries advance economically, they become able to afford better health care for a larger share of their population. An example of this is Taiwan. In the mid-1990s, after several decades of impressive economic growth, Taiwan adopted universal government insurance financed largely by taxes. Prior to its adoption a significant portion of the population had no health insurance. Universal coverage does not mean medical care is free to patients. Under Taiwan’s government insurance, patients are charged a moderate copayment for doctor office visits; preventive services, such as annual checkups, are free. There is 10% patient cost sharing for hospital care until the patient reaches a burden equal to 10% of Taiwan’s per capita income—once this burden ceiling is reached, the government pays the rest. Poor people, however, are exempt from patient cost sharing. The replacement of multiple insurers by a single insurer—the government—has reduced administrative costs and given the government more leverage to implement regulation of hospital and doctor fees. # Summary If the government played no role in health insurance, private insurance firms would be established by entrepreneurs and would offer health insurance that many consumers would buy in order to avoid the risk of being hit with a huge medical bill. If insurance is sold to individual households (not employers), each household would be asked to provide information about its health, and insurers would charge each household a price equal to its expected medical cost. Insurance reduces the price of medical care to patients and therefore increases their demand for medical care; this consequence of insurance has been called moral hazard, but economists view it as a standard response to a cut in price. People who know they are more likely to need medical care are more likely to buy insurance and because of this adverse selection, insurers need to charge a higher price to cover the cost of people who actually enroll; this higher price may, in turn, induce even more adverse selection. Catastrophic insurance covers only medical costs above a high threshold; it protects people against a huge financial burden while giving them an incentive to care about the cost of routine medical care. Insurance affects efficiency and redistribution. If there is no externality, insurance that pays X% of each patient’s medical bill causes an efficiency loss; it would have been better in theory (though it may not have been practical) to give the sick person...