\# 256 Public Finance (residents of surrounding localities) equals the benefit to residents. Then the state government could establish a categorical matching grant under which the state would match, dollar for dollar, the funds raised by any locality for a sewage treatment plan. With this grant, a local government would have to bear only half the cost instead of the full cost of any treatment plant. This should induce local governments to construct a plant as long as the benefit to its own residents exceeds half the total cost. As a result, a locality would construct a plant whenever half the total cost (the locality’s share) is less than the benefit to residents (which equals half the total benefit), and this is socially optimal for both residents and outsiders. Note that if it is estimated that outsiders receive twice the benefit that residents receive, then state government should provide a match of two dollars for every dollar raised by the local government. We will examine grants from higher governments to lower governments in the last section of this chapter. # OPTIMAL FEDERALISM WHEN HOUSEHOLD INCOMES DIFFER Suppose more realistically that households in society differ in income. Most households probably want to live in a locality where most other residents have high incomes for two reasons. First, they believe that if most other residents have high incomes, neighborhoods are likely to be safe and the average educational performance of public school students will probably be above average for the society. Second, high-income residents are able to contribute substantial tax revenue to fund public services. Conversely, most households probably prefer not to live in a locality where most residents have low incomes for two reasons. First, they believe that if most other residents have low incomes, neighborhoods may be unsafe and the average educational performance of other public school students will probably be below average for the society. Second, low-income residents are unable to contribute substantial tax revenue to fund public services. # Residential Location When Incomes Differ: The Separation Process So what happens? Many high-income (i.e., affluent) people move away from large cities and establish suburban towns where most homes have high prices. They often get their town council to pass zoning laws that limit the construction of low-priced homes and rental apartments within their locality. A zoning law may require that a plot of land for a home must exceed a certain size or that the size of a home exceeds a certain square footage, or it may prohibit rental apartment buildings. Thus, this separation process can be summarized this way: The affluent move away from the nonaffluent, the nonaffluent try to follow, but the affluent use zoning laws to maintain their separation. Middle-income people who can’t get into high-income suburbs establish their own suburbs and use zoning to maintain their separation from low-income people. Most low-income people remain in the cities, joined by some high- and middle-income people who prefer living near their city jobs or urban cultural attractions. Of course, not every high-income suburbanite wants to maintain separation from all nonaffluent people. Some affluent people may feel it is wrong to try to separate from nonaffluent people and feel that their own children may benefit from experiencing some diversity in their school. Also, not every low-income household wants to live in a high- or even middle-income suburb despite the well-financed schools and other amenities.