\# 48 Public Finance 0 extra permits; hence with the total demand for extra permits (25) greater than total supply of excess permits (0), the price would rise. And if the price were $60, L would want to emit 0, so it would supply 5 excess permits, and H would want to emit 35, so it would supply 10 excess permits; hence with the total supply of excess permits (15) greater than the total demand for extra permits (0), the price would fall. Thus, the price would end up $40. When H and L buy permits from the government or pay a tax, their cost of production increases, shifting up their supply curve for their product and raising its price. It is sometimes thought that these product price increases can be avoided if the government gives permits to polluters instead of selling them, but this is not so. If polluters are given tradable permits, we have just seen that the permit price will end up the same as if they had been sold permits ($40 in our example). With a permit price of $40 they will face the same increase in the marginal cost of producing the good as they would if the government sold permits at a price of $40 or levied a $40 tax. Because the height of the supply curve of a good equals its marginal cost, the shift up of the supply curve of polluting goods is the same, and therefore the increase in the price of polluting goods is the same in the short run. Thus, this analysis leads to an important conclusion:

> Giving permits to polluting firms will also shift up the supply curve of each polluting good and thereby raise the price of polluting goods, just like selling permits or levying a tax.

\# Selling versus Giving Of course, firms want the government to give rather than sell permits. However, taxpayers should want the government to sell rather than give permits. If the government gives the permits, then it collects no revenue, so it will be unable to cut other taxes. By contrast, with either a pollution tax or the sale of permits, the government raises revenue and can therefore cut other taxes. Moreover, giving rather than selling permits may result in more pollution in the long run if “new” polluters as well as “old” are given free permits. This gift will induce more firms to enter the polluting industry. Even if each firm curtails its pollution, the larger number of firms may end up generating more total pollution in the long run than if the permits were sold. To get an industry to generate the optimal quantity of any good over the long run, all firms must pay all costs generated by their production, and firms should not receive gifts or subsidies that induce additional entry into the industry. When firms use up air and water quality, they should have to pay for it without receiving a gift; otherwise, too many will enter the polluting industry. To prevent this harmful long-run effect, free permits could be given only to old polluters (grandfathering) and not be given to new polluters who would have to buy all their permits. But this favoring of old firms over new firms would create another problem: It would reduce competitiveness in the industry and would constitute a harmful barrier to entry. Even if a new firm could offer a better product at lower cost, it might be unable to compete because it would have to buy all its permits.

> Thus, giving permits is definitely inferior to selling permits. Unfortunately, it has thus far been easier to gain political support for giving permits rather than either selling permits or levying a tax, because polluting firms prefer it and taxpayers don’t realize that giving away permits prevents tax cuts that could occur if permits were sold or emissions taxed.