\# Public Finance in wealth ($4,000), so your income is $40,000. Equivalently, you could have consumed $40,000 this year while holding your wealth constant at $15,000 (instead of increasing it by $4,000 to $19,000); this is another way to see that your comprehensive income is $40,000. Note that the sum of your wage income ($38,000), interest ($1,000), and dividends ($1,000) is also $40,000, so there is no conflict in this example between the economist’s definition of income which is based on uses of income and the conventional definition which is based on sources of income. If you borrowed this year, the inflow would not increase your comprehensive income. Why not? Suppose you borrowed $3,000. If you consumed the $3,000, then your wealth would decrease $3,000, because by definition wealth equals assets minus debt, and your debt has increased $3,000. If you instead invested the $3,000 in stocks and bonds, your consumption would stay the same, your assets (stocks and bonds) would increase $3,000, but your debt would increase $3,000 so your wealth would stay constant. # Gifts or Inheritances Received by a Household If you receive $5,000 this year in a gift ($3,000) from your parents and an inheritance ($2,000) from your grandparent who died, the inflow of $5,000 will raise either your consumption or your wealth $5,000, or it will enable some combination of consumption and increase in wealth that sums to $5,000. Hence, the inflow is a component of your comprehensive income, but currently it is exempt from your U.S. income tax. # The Exclusion from Tax of Employer-Paid Health Insurance If your employer pays you $10,000 that you use to buy health insurance, you must pay income tax on the $10,000; for example, if you’re in a 25% tax bracket, you must pay $2,500 in tax, and will then have $7,500 available for health insurance. However, if your employer takes $10,000 and buys you health insurance, you do not have to pay income tax on the $10,000. This exclusion of employer-paid health insurance from your taxable income provides you a tax saving that depends on your tax bracket; if you’re in a 35% tax bracket, exclusion of $10,000 of health insurance reduces your tax $3,500; if you’re in a 15% tax bracket, $1,500. Why is employer-paid health insurance excluded? One argument is that the exclusion encourages greater health insurance coverage. But as we explain in the section below on credits versus deductions, a refundable tax credit may be a better way to encourage health insurance. # The Deferral of Tax on Contributions to Certain Retirement Accounts If your employer pays you $10,000 that you save in your bank account, you must pay income tax on the $10,000; for example, if you’re in a 25% tax bracket, you must pay $2,500 in tax, and will then have $7,500 available for your bank account. But if your employer takes $10,000 and contributes it to your pension fund or a 401(k) retirement plan, or if you contribute to your pension fund or 401(k) for your retirement or to a regular individual retirement account (IRA), you can defer (postpone) paying tax until you retire and withdraw the funds. 5 Taxes you pay are counted as part of your consumption on the assumption that taxes are your expenditure on consumption of public services. 6 With a regular IRA, the advantage of tax deferral is available only to middle-income households: High income households are excluded, and low-income households that owe no income tax have no benefit.