\# 98 Public Finance individual investment account that might earn a higher return than Social Security will give you when you retire? Third, most policy makers are saying that Social Security needs to be reformed soon to protect your generation, and various conflicting proposals have been offered. For example, President Bush offered a proposal in 2005 and spent a great deal of effort trying to persuade the public to support it and Congress to pass it. Most Democrats in Congress opposed the president’s plan, and some offered their own ideas for reform. A political deadlock occurred, and no reform plan was enacted. Social Security reform is an issue that will continue to be debated in election campaigns, so you should think about it now. This chapter has three sections. The first section presents an analysis of four different ways to prepare for retirement; the second describes the U.S. Social Security program in detail; the third considers options for Social Security reform. # FOUR WAYS TO PREPARE FOR RETIREMENT Before examining the U.S. Social Security system and proposals for reform, it is important to pause to carefully consider the possible ways to prepare for retirement and the advantages and disadvantages of each way. Table 5.1 shows four ways to prepare for retirement.

| Preparing for Retirement        | Workers support retirees |          |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------ | -------- |
| Individually                    | Collectively             |          |
| Historical                      | U.S. Social Security     |          |
| Each generation self-sufficient | Recent                   | Possible |

In the first row of Table 5.1 “Workers support retirees,” under the first column, “Individually,” the entry is “Historical.” Throughout the long sweep of history until recently, this was probably the most important and widely used way, and it is therefore labeled “Historical.” When parents became too old to work in the fields or hunt, their own children took care of them by providing food. The support from workers to “retirees” was handled within individual families. When you got too old to work, you depended on your own children; they would take care of you just as you had taken care of your parents when they became too old to work. Thus, there was a compact between the generations within individual families. One advantage of this way is that the care is between people with personal bonds—workers are helping their own parents. One disadvantage to this method is that not everyone has children who are able and willing to care for them. Some people either never had children or had children who died before middle age; some children are selfish; some children are unable to help their parents because they don’t earn enough—for example, because they have a chronic illness or disability or because they have special burdens such as chronically sick children. Move to the right in the first row to the second column, “Collectively”; the entry is “U.S. Social Security.” Under this method, utilized by the U.S. Social Security system, the government taxes all workers and then sends benefit checks to all retirees. Hence, workers collectively support all retirees. The advantage of this method, compared with the historical method, is that old people are not dependent on their own children; the existence, attitude, or ability of their own children is no longer crucial to their well-being in old age. Each old person is supported collectively by all children in society.