\# Chapter 9 Consumption Taxes

| TABLE 9.6           |                 |                          |                        |         |         |
| ------------------- | --------------- | ------------------------ | ---------------------- | ------- | ------- |
| Initial Deposit     | Interest Earned | Taxes Paid on Withdrawal | Retirement Consumption |         |         |
|                     | Y tax (saving)  | $850                     | $34                    | $5.10   | $878.90 |
| C tax (regular IRA) |                 | $1,000                   | $40                    | $156.00 | $884.00 |
| W tax (Roth IRA)    | $850            |                          | $34                    | $0.00   | $884.00 |

were no tax, you would save $1,000 and earn $40 in interest—a 4% return—and consume $1,040 in retirement. Hence, with no tax, your reward for saving would be 4%. Assume you are currently in a 15% income tax bracket and will remain in that tax bracket after retirement. If you want to consume rather than save, you must pay a tax of $150 so that you can consume $850. But if you save, you forgo consuming $850 this year in order to consume more than $850 in the future. Row 1 in Table 9.6 shows what happens with ordinary saving under an income tax (Y tax). On your $1,000 of wage income you must pay $150 in tax, so you deposit $850 in your saving account; it earns $34 of interest on which you pay $5.10 in tax, so you consume $878.90 in retirement. Note that $878.90/$850 = 1.034, so your after-tax return is 3.4% (which is 85% of 4%). This income tax reduces your reward for saving from 4% to 3.4%. Row 2 in the table shows what happens under a consumption tax (C tax), which is also the treatment that occurs under the current income tax with a regular IRA or 401(k) plan where tax is deferred until withdrawal. On your $1,000 of wage income you pay no tax, so you deposit $1,000 and it earns $40; but you must pay a 15% tax on the entire withdrawal, leaving $884 for retirement consumption. Note that $884/$850 = 1.04, so your after-tax return is 4%, the same as if there were no tax. A consumption tax does not reduce your reward for saving—it stays at 4%. Row 3 in the table shows what happens with a labor income (wage) tax, which is also the treatment that occurs under the current income tax with a Roth IRA where there is no deduction in the year of saving but then there is no further tax (because capital income earned is exempt from tax and there is no tax on withdrawal). On your $1,000 you must pay $150 in tax, so you deposit $850 in your saving account, it earns $34 of interest on which you pay no tax, and you consume $884 in retirement. Note that $884/$850 = 1.04, so your after-tax return is 4%, the same as if there were no tax. A labor income tax does not reduce your reward for saving—it stays 4%. Thus, the C tax (regular IRA) and the W tax (Roth IRA) result in the same retirement consumption ($884), which is greater than retirement consumption under regular saving ($878.90). Under both the C tax and the W tax (both IRAs), the after-tax rate of return is 4%—the same as if there were no tax—whereas with ordinary saving under the current income tax with a tax rate of 15%, the after-tax rate of return is 85% of 4%, or 3.4%. The equality of the reward for saving under the C tax and the W tax depends on you remaining in the same tax bracket in retirement (in this example, 15%). If your tax bracket will be lower in retirement, then the C tax will give you more retirement consumption than a W tax, because with a C tax taxation is deferred until retirement. If your tax bracket will be greater in retirement, then a W tax (Roth IRA) will give you more retirement consumption than a C tax (regular IRA), because with a Roth IRA there is no taxation in retirement. 7 The regular IRA deferral is implemented on the 1040 as one of the adjustments (i.e., subtractions) from gross income to obtain adjusted gross income. Note that only middle-income households benefit from the regular IRA deduction: High-income households are excluded, and low-income households that owe no income tax have no benefit.