\# 46 Public Finance Plan need not allow abatement costs and the price of polluting goods to be excessive permanently; if they are excessive, the supply of permits can be raised, reducing permit prices, abatement costs, and the price of polluting goods. This increase in the supply of permits could be triggered automatically whenever the permit price rises above some designated value. So which policy is better? It depends on which goal the citizenry gives a higher priority for a particular pollutant. If the citizenry wants to be sure of never exceeding the pollution target, then the permit plan is better. However, if the citizenry wants to be sure of never causing firms to incur high abatement costs (resulting in large price increases to consumers of polluting goods), then the tax is better. # A Hybrid Policy: A Permit System with a Safety Valve It is possible to compromise and partially address both concerns with a hybrid policy. The hybrid policy is a permit system with a safety valve. The government would choose an initial pollution target and try to sell the corresponding amount of permits to firms. If the price needed to reduce permit demand to the initial supply turns out to be too high, the government would promptly raise the supply of permits to keep the permit price below a target ceiling. The safety valve is the prompt expansion of permit supply by the government to keep the permit price (and therefore the MAC that firms incur) from rising too high. The hybrid policy is a compromise: The initial pollution target is no longer rigid, but it is subject to prompt relaxation in the event that meeting it would cause firms to incur an excessive abatement cost. # Government Gives Permits In the second alternative, the government gives, rather than sells, the 50 permits to the firms; however, if a firm wants to emit more than its permit “gift,” it can buy extra permits from a firm that is willing to emit less than its gift and sell its excess permits. Some firms will demand extra permits, and some firms will supply excess permits. The price of permits will adjust until the demand for extra permits equals the supply of excess permits. So which permit price will equate demand and supply? If the price were $40, each firm will realize that no matter how many permits it was given, the cost to the firm of another emission is $40. That’s clearly true for a firm that wants to emit more than it was given—it has to buy additional permits at a price of $40. But even if the firm is content to emit less than it was given, the last unit it emits costs $40 because it prevents the firm from selling that permit at a price of $40. No matter how many permits the firm was given, emitting another unit costs $40. But then under this plan, if the permit price is $40, each firm will emit exactly the quantity it would have emitted if it had been taxed $40. From Figure 2.5, with a tax of $40, firm L would want to emit 10 and firm H would want to emit 40: Even if the permits are given to firms, each firm’s emissions will still be determined by its MAC curve in Figure 2.5. According to Figure 2.5, if the price were $20, L would want to emit 30 and H, 45; if the price were $40, L would want to emit 10 and H, 40; and if the price were $60, L would want to emit 0 and H, 35. # Table 2.1

| Permit Distribution | Firm L           | Firm H        |                  |   |
| ------------------- | ---------------- | ------------- | ---------------- | - |
| Permits Given       | Permits Supplied | Permits Given | Permits Supplied |   |
| Initial             | 25               | 15            | 25               |   |
