\# 224 Public Finance As we move from low- to high-income households, the ratio of tax to income will rise. On the other hand, if a single rate applies to all income, the income tax will be proportional: As we move from low- to high-income households, the ratio of tax to income will stay constant. Economists generally define a household’s comprehensive income as its consumption plus the increase in its wealth. The U.S. income tax, however, differs from this definition by excluding gifts and bequests received by the household, deferring tax on unrealized capital gains, excluding employer-paid health insurance, deferring tax on contributions to pension funds, and taxing nominal rather than real (inflation-adjusted) capital income. Either a tax credit or a tax deduction can be used to encourage or reward a household for spending on X. With the tax credit, Congress can vary the credit by household income however it desires and set the credit rates low or high. By contrast, with a tax deduction, Congress has no control over how the tax benefit varies with household income or the size of the tax benefit: Automatically, the tax benefit varies directly with the tax bracket of the household, and the size of the tax benefit equals the household’s tax bracket rate times the amount spent on X. Under the current income tax, itemized deductions include state and local tax payments, home mortgage interest payments, and out-of-pocket medical expense in excess of 7.5% of AGI; the personal exemption and the child tax credit reduce tax owed according to the number of children. An income tax entails taxing both capital income and labor income. Issues that arise in taxing capital income include incentives for retirement saving, treatment of capital gains, the measurement and taxation of business income and corporate income, and an estate tax on accumulated wealth. Issues that arise in taxing labor income include the effect on a potential second earner, the difference between a labor income tax and an income tax, and the effects of a payroll tax.