\# 116 Public Finance # The Impact on Work For a worker with annual wage income less than $102,000 in 2008, the combined employer-employee payroll tax for Social Security is 12.4% of wage income. Does the tax reduce the number of hours worked? Most workers probably treat the FICA tax like any other tax and view take-home pay as their reward for work. If so, it is possible that the Social Security payroll tax causes some discouragement to work. Most economists believe, however, that the effect on heads of households is small because their labor supply is inelastic—it does not vary much in response to taxes. The effect on spouses who would be second earners may be somewhat larger because their labor supply is sometimes more optional and hence more elastic. There is a feature of the benefit structure of Social Security that may somewhat discourage second-earner spouses from working if they are aware of it: the 50% spousal benefit. Even if a second-earner spouse doesn’t work, he will be entitled to a benefit equal to 50% of the primary earner’s benefit. Therefore, unless he earns enough to qualify for a larger benefit, working would not bring him any additional future Social Security benefit. What can be done to reduce the discouragement to work faced by potential second-earner spouses due to the 50% spousal benefit? One option would be to gradually phase down the spousal benefit from 50% to perhaps 33%. It would be interesting to conduct a survey to see how many working-age spouses are aware of the 50% spousal benefit and whether they say it has affected their decision about working. # The Impact on Saving, Investment, and Capital Accumulation Suppose the choice for workers is between saving for their own retirement and paying taxes that finance benefits to current retirees (with the expectation that the same will be done for them when they retire). Aggregate saving, investment, and capital accumulation would be higher in the economy if workers save for their own retirement than it would be if they paid taxes that financed retiree consumption. One way to see this is to recognize that as workers work and pay Social Security taxes, thereby increasing the Social Security benefits to which they will be entitled when they retire, they are accumulating wealth—social security wealth. If workers made deposits in their bank account or bought bonds or stocks, they would be accumulating private wealth. In either case, they would be able to receive a flow of benefits during retirement. Workers have to accumulate a certain amount of wealth to finance a comfortable retirement. If they accumulate social security wealth by paying taxes as they work, they do not have to accumulate as much private wealth; nor can they afford to accumulate as much private wealth. So workers who accumulate social security wealth should save less and consume more than they otherwise would have. How much social security wealth does a given worker have? Although it might seem natural to add all the taxes the worker has paid into Social Security, a better measure is to add the benefits that the worker will receive upon retiring. A worker should care about future social security benefits when deciding how much less to save (how much less private wealth to accumulate). In order to compare a worker’s social security wealth to the private wealth that the worker has accumulated in a bank account, it is important to realize that the worker’s bank account will continue to earn compound interest in the years until the worker retires and starts receiving social security benefits. To make a fair comparison, we can either compound the worker’s bank account forward to see what it would grow to by retirement or do the reverse with social security benefits—we can discount (the reverse of compounding) them back to the present to see how much the worker would need to