\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency they pay the station operator $3.30 they will also have to pay the government another $1.00 for a total of $4.30. When D shifts down to D, the price at the pump will fall to $3.30. Station operators will receive $3.30 per gallon, and consumers will bear a burden (including the tax) of $4.30 per gallon \[as in Figure 7.1(a), quantity will fall from 100 to 90 and tax revenue will equal $90]. But this is exactly the same result as in Figure 7.1(a). It doesn’t matter for the division of the burden who writes the check (pays the tax). # The Tax Wedge Shortcut Here’s a shortcut for finding the division of the tax burden between buyers and sellers. Instead of shifting up the supply curve \[Figure 7.1(a)] or shifting down the demand curve \[Figure 7.1(c)], simply insert a vertical tax wedge equal to the amount of the tax (labeled BA and equal to $1.00 in this example) between the original demand and supply curves, as shown in Figure 7.1(d). Just start at the D/S intersection point, and move left until the vertical gap between D and S (the tax wedge) equals the amount of the tax ($1.00). This tax wedge diagram shows how much quantity falls, how much burden the demanders bear (the rise in price along the D curve), and how much burden the suppliers bear (the fall in price along the S curve). Note also that tax revenue equals the area of the tax wedge rectangle, because the height of the rectangle is the tax per unit (T = $1.00) and the base of the rectangle is the number of units, 90, so tax revenue equals $90. The tax wedge shortcut makes it clear that the only thing that matters for the division of the burden is the relative steepness of the two curves: Whoever has the steeper (less elastic) curve bears most of the burden. # A Sales Tax Now consider a 6% sales tax as shown in Figure 7.2. A 6% sales tax collected from the seller raises the seller’s marginal cost 6% and therefore shifts up the supply curve 6% from S to S'; every point on the S' curve is 6% higher than the point directly below it, so the S' curve is slightly steeper than the S curve. Note that a percent-of-price tax, which is also called an ad valorem tax, makes the new supply curve slightly steeper. # FIGURE 7.2 A Sales Tax

|      | $106 |    |
| ---- | ---- | -- |
| $6   | S'   |    |
| $101 |      | D  |
| $100 |      |    |
|      | QT   | QN |
|      | Q    |    |
