\# 32 Public Finance Technological options. Some can cut back pollution easily with little additional cost. Others must incur a substantial additional cost to achieve the same reduction. Since polluters will pass on cost increases to consumers, we want the allocation to take account of these technological options. # A Pollution Tax Pollution prices would handle the allocation problem nicely. First, consider the tax method. Suppose the government sets a tax of $40 per unit of pollutant X. The polluter whose products have good substitutes will reason: “I can’t afford to pay this tax because when I try to pass the cost on to my customers by raising my price, they will simply shift to substitutes.” By contrast, the polluter whose products are highly valued by consumers will reason: “I can afford to pay the tax because when I try to pass the cost on to my customers, they will keep buying.” So who ends up cutting pollution sharply? The polluter whose product has good substitutes. And who ends up cutting back relatively little? The polluter whose product is highly valued by consumers. This is exactly the pattern of cutback we want. Next, consider the polluter with technological options that enable a reduction in pollution at little additional cost: “Rather than pay the tax, it is cheaper for me to switch technologies and reduce pollution.” By contrast, consider the polluter with few technological options. Only at high cost can pollution be reduced: “I’m still better off paying the tax, because it would be even more expensive for me to switch technologies.” So who cuts back pollution sharply? The polluter with good technological options. And who cuts back pollution relatively little? The polluter with few technological options. This is exactly the pattern of reduction we want. Of course, when each polluter of X decides how much to pollute if the tax is $40, it may turn out that aggregate pollution of X will be 1,200 or 800 instead of the target, 1,000 units. If pollution is 1,200 units, then the government should raise the tax above $40; if pollution is 800, then the government should lower the tax below $40. Eventually, the government will find the tax that approximately achieves the aggregate target of 1,000. # Pollution Permits Now consider the permit method. The government would sell 1,000 permits, so the supply of permits would be fixed at 1,000. The practical aspects of how the government would actually sell or auction the permits requires careful thought and should be based on the practical methods that have been used, for example, when the government sells U.S. Treasury bonds. Here we sketch a simple hypothetical method which may not be the most practical. Under this method, the government would get polluters to reveal their demand for permits by asking them to place orders for permits at each of the following prices: $30, $40, and $50. The polluters would submit their orders at each price. For example, at a price of $30, polluters might order (demand) 1,200, while at a price of $50, polluters might order 800 permits. Suppose that at a price of $40, polluters would want to order 1,000 permits. The government would then announce that the permit price is $40 and would sell each polluter the number of permits each polluter ordered at that price. If the price of a permit is $40, then a $40 per unit pollution tax should produce exactly the same pattern of pollution reduction across polluters and yield aggregate pollution equal to 1,000. After all, a polluter doesn’t care whether the $40 price per unit is called a permit price or a tax. She will figure her profit and do the same thing.