\# 244 Public Finance The present value of Ant’s consumption taxes is $100 + ($150/1.50) $200, the same as Grasshopper’s. Thus, under a consumption tax, Ant and Grasshopper would pay the same present value of taxes over the year. By contrast, under an income tax, Ant pays a higher present value of taxes than Grasshopper does over the year. Ant and Grasshopper pay the same income tax in the summer. Grasshopper pays no income tax in winter, but Ant pays income tax in winter on the interest income that he earns from his summer saving. Clearly Ant’s present value of income taxes is higher than Grasshopper’s. Thus, a labor income tax or a consumption tax would levy the same present value of taxes on Ant and Grasshopper. By contrast, an income tax would levy a higher present value of taxes on Ant than on Grasshopper. Wouldn’t Aesop think it unfair to tax Ant more than Grasshopper? # POLLUTION TAXES As we saw in Chapter 2, pollution taxes are generally recommended by economists to reduce pollution. Recall that polluters will find it profitable to reduce pollution as long as the marginal abatement cost (i.e., the cost of reducing pollution another unit) is less than the tax. If the government sets the tax equal to the marginal damage to the environment, profit-seeking polluters will unintentionally achieve the socially optimal reduction in pollution; they will reduce pollution as long as the marginal abatement cost is less than the marginal damage. The optimal pollution tax will therefore improve society’s welfare because the benefit of avoiding environmental damage will exceed the cost to the economy of reducing pollution. A CBO study estimates that a tax of $100 per ton of carbon would reduce carbon about 15%. In the United States in 2005, about 1.70 billion tons of carbon were consumed, so a 15% cutback would have been about 0.25 billion tons and would have reduced carbon consumption to about 1.45 billion tons. A $100 per ton carbon tax would have generated pollution tax revenue equal to $100 per ton × 1.45 billion tons = $145 billion, which is about 1% of GDP (GDP was about $12,500 billion in 2005). Because federal tax revenue is about 20% of GDP, this tax would have contributed about 5% of federal tax revenue. Thus, if Congress uses a set of pollution taxes to reduce carbon emissions and other pollutants, the pollution tax revenue might be about 1% of GDP and contribute about 5% of federal revenue. # TRANSPORTATION TAXES In theory, user fees (tolls) rather than taxes should be used to finance roads, bridges, and airports. A vehicle should be charged a toll equal to the wear and tear it imposes on a particular road plus the congestion cost it imposes on other drivers. A truck should be charged a higher toll than a car because it causes more damage to the road. The toll should be higher at peak hours than at off-peak hours, because at peak hours each vehicle imposes a higher congestion cost on other drivers. Similarly, each airplane should be charged a toll each time it uses an airport. In practice, however, user fees are sometimes unfeasible or costly. Although highways and bridges can use tollbooths to collect tolls because entrances and exits are limited, urban streets cannot. Tollbooths require drivers to slow down and wait in line, thereby imposing a significant cost. Thus, instead of a toll, a gasoline tax has been used to collect revenue from drivers. A gasoline tax, in contrast to other taxes, focuses its