\# Public Finance tWH, then L/R ½t² WH/tWH ½t. The ratio of efficiency loss L to tax revenue R equals L/R ½t. For example, if 0.4 and t 25%, the formula says L/R 5%: For every $100 of revenue raised, there is an efficiency loss of $5. # The Efficiency Loss from a Tax on Capital Income Figure 7.10 shows the efficiency loss from a tax on capital income. The efficiency loss equals the area of the triangle BAD. With a 40% tax on the saver’s interest income, the total amount saved by all savers is $100,000. The last $100 saved enables the borrowing firm to buy a machine that raises its net revenue $5 per year, and the firm pays the saver $5 of interest income; the saver pays $2 tax (40% of $5) and keeps $3. The tax drives a wedge between the firm’s 5% return on the machine and each saver’s after-tax return of 3%. Starting from total saving by all savers of $100,000, it would be possible to increase saving by $100 and make everyone better off. Each saver only needs to receive a 3% return to keep his utility constant. Why? Because the saver received only $3 after taxes on the last $100 he saved, yet he was still willing to save this last $100. However, the $100 machine generates a return of 5%. Hence, 3% can be given to the saver, and the remaining 2% can be distributed to everyone else making them better off. Each additional $100 of saving from $100,000 to $120,000 generates a return on the machine that exceeds the return that savers require to keep their utility constant; this surplus is the vertical distance between the D curve and the S curve. The sum of the surpluses from $100,000 to $120,000 equals the area of the triangle BAD. Thus, the area of the triangle measures the efficiency loss from the tax on capital income. With these numbers, the area is ½(2% $20,000) $200, so the efficiency loss is $200.¹⁰ The steeper the S and D curves in Figure 7.10, the smaller the efficiency loss. 10 A technical point: The S curve in Figure 7.10 is the compensated supply curve. An explanation is given in the appendix to this chapter. An alternative analysis of the efficiency loss from a tax on capital income that applies Figure 7.8 to the demand and supply of a good called retirement consumption is given in Martin Feldstein, “The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation,” Journal of Political Economy 86, no. 2 (April 1978), pp. S29–S51. # FIGURE 7.10 # The Efficiency Loss from a Capital Income Tax The efficiency loss equals the triangle’s area. B 5% D 3% A $100,000 $120,000 Saving