\# 320 Public Finance # Case Study # The Deficit and Interest Rates: An Estimate from U.S. Data In two papers in 2003 and 2004, Brookings Institution economists William Gale and Peter Orszag (now the director of the Congressional Budget Office) examined empirical evidence concerning the hypothesis that an increase in government borrowing following a tax cut raises interest rates (illustrated in Figure 13.1).\* In these papers, they reviewed past empirical studies and provided a new empirical analysis of U.S. data. In Figure 13.1 it is implicitly assumed that households spend rather than save their tax cut; if they saved the entire tax cut and deposited it in banks, then the supply curve of loanable funds would shift right as much as the demand curve for loanable funds and the interest rate wouldn’t be bid up.† So a key question becomes: Do consumers mainly consume or save a tax cut? Gale and Orszag examined U.S. data to see how consumption responds to a tax cut. They found that a tax cut is mainly consumed, not saved, so that the supply curve of loanable funds hardly shifts right, implying that the interest rate would rise in Figure 13.1. All of this happened in 2001 in the United States. Thus, some U.S. data are generated by a recession causing an increase in the deficit and a decrease in the interest rate. But Gale and Orszag are interested in what happens to interest rates if the government enacts a tax cut that generates a deficit, not what happens to the deficit and interest rates if there is a recession due to pessimism. Actual U.S. data are generated by both occurrences. There are techniques to try to separate the two occurrences, but they don’t work perfectly. Thus, any estimate should be treated with caution. How much does the interest rate rise if, instead of running a balanced budget, every year the government runs a deficit of 1% of GDP? Gale and Orszag examined year-to-year variations in interest rates and the deficit (and “ran a regression” with the interest rate as the dependent variable and the deficit as one of the independent variables). They estimated that a permanent increase in the deficit of one percentage point of GDP (for example, from 0% to 1% of GDP) raises the (long-term) interest rate roughly half of a percentage point (for example, from 4.0% to 4.5%). \* William Gale and Peter Orszag, “Economic effects of Sustained Budget Deficits,” National Tax Journal 56, no. 3 (September 2003), pp. 463–85; and “Budget Deficits, National Saving, and Interest Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2004 (2), pp. 101–87. † Economist Robert Barro contends that families will save their tax cut because they think they will have to pay higher taxes in the future and has called such thinking “Ricardian.” No direct evidence has ever been provided that ordinary people think this way when they get a tax cut. The simplest balanced budget rule would be a prohibition on borrowing (or printing money), so that government spending can never exceed tax revenue. No excuses would be permitted. This might be called an “always” balanced budget rule or a “no excuses” balanced budget rule. Such a rule would certainly make citizens, and politicians, weigh the tax cost of any program against its benefit. Unfortunately, such a rule would be risky: It could force the government to take action in the middle of a recession that would make the recession worse. # The Problem with an Always Balanced Budget Rule Suppose the economy is normal (not in recession or boom) and government spending equals tax revenue, so the budget is balanced. Then the economy falls into recession.