\# Public Finance # FIGURE 11.1 # The Socially Optimal Quality of a Public School The quality where ΣMB equals MC is socially optimal.

|   | $600    | •  | MC  |   |   |
| - | ------- | -- | --- | - | - |
|   | $400    | •  | ΣMB |   |   |
|   | $200    | •  | MBY |   |   |
|   |         |    | MBO |   |   |
|   | 8       | 10 | 12  |   |   |
|   | Quality |    |     |   |   |

Symmetrically, suppose quality is greater than 10 units—for example 12 units. Then it would be possible to make both families better off by choosing a lower quality. How? Starting from 12 units, suppose they save the $600 cost by making quality 1 unit less and then divide the savings, so that Y saves $400 and O saves $200. From the diagram, the MB that each family gives up would be less than its cost saving, so it would be better off if quality were reduced from 12 units to 11 units; the same would be true from 11 units to 10 units. If quality is 10 units, it would not be possible to make both families better off by raising or lowering quality. When it is not possible to make everyone better off by making a change from a particular situation, economists call the situation efficient. So 10 units is the socially optimal (i.e., efficient) quality of the public school for this town of two families. Each family’s preferred quality depends on its cost-share, or tax price. Suppose the local government divides the tax burden among the families in the ratio of 2:1, the same ratio as their MBs. Because the cost per unit of quality is $600, Y will be taxed $400 per unit and O will be taxed $200 per unit. With these tax prices, each family looks at its own MB curve, compares the height of its MB at each level of quality to its share of the marginal cost, and decides how much quality it would want. Note that each family’s MB curve is its demand curve, because at each price that the family faces (its cost-share), the curve tells how many units of quality the family would want to “buy” (i.e., demand). With these tax prices, both families would want 10 units of quality. Up until 10 units, each family’s MB exceeds its tax price, but beyond 10 units, each family’s MB is less than its tax price. Suppose that the local government divided the tax burden equally among the two families, so that each family is taxed $300 per unit of quality. Then from Figure 11.1 clearly Y would have wanted (i.e., demanded) more than 10 units, while O would have wanted less. There would have been no unanimity. The local government cannot know with certainty the height of the MB curve of each family. Suppose that each family’s tax is set at t percent of the property value of the family’s home (so t is the property tax rate). Suppose that the height of every family’s MB curve just happens to be proportional to its property, so if one family has twice the...