\# Chapter 12 Low–Income Assistance The EITC encourages a person to work rather than not work. However, once a person works enough to reach the phase-out range, the phase-out rate (i.e., the marginal tax rate) provides some discouragement to additional work. Reducing the phase-out rate—for example, from 20% to 16% for a married couple with two or more children—would enable the couple to gain $84 instead of $80 for each additional $100 earned in the phase-out range. The EITC causes a marriage bonus in some cases but imposes a marriage penalty in other cases. Consider a single man who works for $12,000 and a single mother of two children who doesn’t work. The single man gets a small EITC and the nonworking mother gets none. But if they marry, they will get the maximum EITC of about $4,800. In this case, the EITC gives a marriage bonus. But consider a single mother of two children who works for $12,000 and gets an EITC of $4,800. If she marries a single man who works for $28,000 and she continues to work for $12,000, she will lose the EITC because the couple’s income will reach $40,000. In this case, the EITC imposes a marriage penalty. Due to a recent change in the law, the EITC already gives some advantage to marriage by delaying the income at which the phasedown begins according to marital status. Further raising the EITC of a married couple relative to single parents (e.g., by extending the married couple’s phase-in range above $12,000 and hence raising its maximum EITC) would reduce the marriage penalty in cases like this one. The EITC phase-in rate is 34% for one child and 40% for two children, but it remains at 40% for three children. Yet a family with three children needs more income to escape poverty than a family with two children. Giving a higher EITC for a third child—for example, raising the phase-in rate to 42% for three children—would reduce poverty for working families with three or more children. Of course each of these three changes would raise the cost of the EITC to taxpayers, so the additional cost of each change must be weighed against the additional benefit. # Welfare A welfare program gives a cash benefit to a family according to its need; it therefore gives its maximum benefit to a family with no income. The welfare benefit is at a maximum when the recipient doesn’t work, and the benefit is reduced as the person works and earns income. Thus, welfare does not encourage or reward work. Welfare is motivated by the liberal sentiment to help families to the degree that they need help. There is broad support and not much controversy over the federal welfare program that spent $36 billion in 2007 to provide assistance to the aged, blind, and disabled—supplementary security income (SSI)—because recipients are often unable to work and need help. Also not very controversial is the federal food stamps program that spent $35 billion in 2007 to make food cheaper for poor people. More controversial is the welfare program called Temporary Assistance for Needy Families that provided $24 billion of cash benefits in 2007 to poor single mothers and their children. This welfare program for single mothers is controversial because the mothers are generally able to work, and citizens disagree about whether these women should work, whether some mothers are to blame for their predicament, and whether the absent fathers rather than taxpayers can and should be made to support their children. The Welfare Reform Act of 1996 moved the U.S. welfare program for single mothers and their children in a conservative direction. The act imposed time limits, work requirements, and certain conditions on young unwed mothers; converted the federal contribution from a matching grant to a fixed block grant in order to limit federal