\# Public Finance Cash income rather than a price subsidy through insurance. Citizens should support use of the insurance price subsidy if they judge that the social benefit of redistribution from the healthy to the sick outweighs the efficiency loss. If there is a positive externality—that is, if other people experience utility when sick people get medical care—then an insurance price subsidy equal to the positive externality would increase efficiency. Insurance redistributes resources and utility from the healthy to the sick; economics cannot declare a particular degree of redistribution to be optimal, deficient, or excessive. If insurers (private firms or government) impose a price ceiling by paying less than the market-clearing price, then the result will be waiting lists and delays in obtaining service. Patients rely on doctors as their agents to help them make medical decisions; under fee for service, there is a risk that doctors will do too much, while under capitation (used by health maintenance organizations), there is a risk that doctors will do too little. Insurers—private and government—perform some regulation by paying less than doctors and hospitals charge and refusing to pay for some medical care they judge unnecessary or ineffective. A key feature of private insurance in the United States is that it is sold mainly to employers rather than to individual households. Selling to large employers reduces sales cost per person covered; in return, insurers agree to cover all employees without health restrictions. Employees end up bearing most of the burden of employer-provided insurance because employers pay lower cash salaries when they buy insurance. Rising medical expenses are driven by new technology raising costs and insurance raising demand. The U.S. system of mainly employer-provided private insurance covers many but not all households. Low-income families and children have received government assistance through Medicaid and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program. Various new public policies have been proposed for working families. Under the strategy of consumer-driven health care, households would be given a tax incentive to buy high-deductible catastrophic insurance that would keep them paying routine medical bills and therefore keep them cost-conscious in choosing medical care; contributions to a fund to pay their routine bills called a health savings account would be tax-free. Under the responsible health insurance plan, households would be required to obtain health insurance, a refundable tax credit would help them afford it, and fallback (last-resort) insurance would make sure they can obtain insurance at a reasonable premium. Under an employer mandate, employers would be required to provide insurance for their employees; under an employer play-or-pay plan, employers would either have to provide insurance or pay a tax to help cover the uninsured. Under government reinsurance, government would reimburse private insurers X% of the amount by which a patient’s medical bill exceeds a high threshold; this would enable private insurers to charge lower premiums and should therefore increase the number of households that can afford insurance. Under government insurance that replaces private insurance, all households would be covered, government would pay a large share (there might be some patient cost sharing) of all medical bills, taxes would be levied to fund the program, and regulation of medical care provided would try to limit price increases but might result in wait lists. Medicare, enacted in 1965, is government insurance for retirees. Without government insurance many retirees would have difficulty obtaining private insurance at an affordable premium because older people often have high expected medical costs. Medicare is financed by a payroll tax, general revenue, and contributions from retirees. Drug coverage was recently added. Medicare regulates doctor and hospital fees.