\# Chapter 9 Consumption Taxes burden on drivers who benefit from using roads. A gasoline tax, however, is inferior to a toll.8 It does not vary according to the wear and tear each vehicle imposes on the road. It does not vary with the cost of maintaining one road versus another road. It does not vary according to peak versus off-peak hours. Thus, whenever possible, tolls should be used instead. Advances in technology have been making tolls more feasible and less costly. Tolls are now assessed electronically (e.g., “EZ Pass”) on highways, reducing the waiting time at tollbooths. Some cities (e.g., Stockholm, Sweden) are experimenting with electronically assessing tolls on urban streets. As technology advances, the financing of transportation should be shifted from taxes to tolls. # HEALTH TAXES Two different arguments can be given for taxing such products as tobacco and alcohol that are usually harmful to health when consumed excessively. The first is an externality argument. The second may be called an internality argument. The externality argument is that the excessive user of the unhealthful product may impose costs on others. A smoker who contracts lung cancer or an alcoholic who damages his liver may not pay the full cost of his medical treatment. Smokers who buy their own health insurance directly from an insurance company are often charged a higher premium because they smoke, but smokers who obtain health insurance through their employer usually are not charged (through a reduction in cash salary) more than non-smoking employees. Perhaps surprisingly, it is not immediately clear that a smoker imposes a net cost on others. A person who dies before age 62 from lung cancer collects no Social Security or Medicare benefits despite years of paying payroll taxes. Thus, it is possible that smoking actually reduces the costs a person imposes on others. It also depends on how harmful secondary smoke is to others. Careful quantitative analysis is required to determine whether smoking imposes a net cost on others and, if so, how much.9 Excessive alcohol consumption can lead to drunk driving that severely harms other people. Thus, even though alcoholics who die before age 62 collect no Social Security or Medicare benefits, drunk driving imposes a large cost on others. Once again, careful quantitative analysis is required to measure the net cost to others.10 The internality argument is that the excessive user of the unhealthful product may impose costs on himself that he underestimates. Of course, a rational planner with perfect knowledge, foresight, and self-discipline would not underestimate. He would even take account of the fact that becoming addicted would make quitting hard in the future. However, it seems likely that many teenagers and young adults (and perhaps even older people!) are not rational planners with perfect knowledge, foresight, and self-discipline. A tax may help a young person make decisions that are in his best long-run interest—decisions for which he will be grateful when he is older. The practical quantitative issue is to estimate the optimal taxes for tobacco and alcohol. This requires estimating the external cost; it also requires estimating the internal cost if the internality argument is accepted. The tax can be imposed on the 8 As we saw in Chapter 2, a gasoline tax may be justified as a pollution tax. If so, ideally the tax should be varied according to the pollution generated by a particular grade of gasoline. 9 Frank Sloan, Jan Ostermann, Gabriel Picone, Christopher Conover, and Donald Taylor, The Price of Smoking. The MIT Press, 2004. 10 Philip Cook, Paying the Tab: The Costs and Benefits of Alcohol Control. Princeton University Press, 2007.