\# 240 Public Finance The rest of Table 9.5 shows the distribution of federal tax burdens across income classes. For all federal taxes, the bottom 20% of households bear 0.8% of the nation’s federal tax burden, while the top 20% of households bear 68.7% of the nation’s federal tax burden (and the top 1% bears 27.6% of the federal tax burden). The top 20% of households bear 86.3% of the federal individual income tax burden, 43.6% of the federal social insurance payroll tax burden, 87.8% of the federal corporate income tax burden, and 34.1% of the federal excise tax burden (the top 1% bears 38.8% of the federal individual income tax burden, 4.0% of the federal social insurance payroll tax burden, 58.6% of the federal corporate income tax burden, and 5.5% of the federal excise tax burden). Tables 9.4 and 9.5 imply that replacing the income tax with a retail sales tax, value-added tax, or flat tax would shift the distribution of the tax burden away from high-income households. The reason is simply that the federal income tax is a highly progressive component of the current federal tax system. As shown in Table 8.4, graduated income tax rates rise from 10% to 35% on labor and interest income (the income tax would be even more progressive if these rates also applied to dividends and capital gains, which currently have a 15% maximum rate). As discussed earlier, it is true that the burden of the retail sales or value-added tax on low-income households can be substantially reduced or even eliminated by an adequate cash rebate. It is also true that the burden of the flat tax on low-income households is substantially reduced or even eliminated by the exemption of the first $25,000 of wage income from tax. However, these three taxes are inevitably less progressive on high-income households because they all have a single tax rate rather than rising tax rates. Consequently, citizens who believe that too large a share of the tax burden is currently born by high-income households would like the redistribution that results from replacing the income tax with a RST, VAT, or flat tax. Conversely, citizens who believe the share of the tax burden currently born by high-income households is appropriate would not like the redistribution that results from replacing the income tax with a RST, VAT, or flat tax. By contrast, replacing the progressive income tax by a household consumption tax with sufficiently graduated rates (instead of by a RST, VAT, or flat tax) could avoid a redistribution of the tax burden. The household consumption tax rates would have to be more graduated than the income tax rates to offset the fact that the ratio of consumption to income falls as we move from low- to high-income households. This is the only consumption tax that could be made as progressive as the current income tax. Replacing the income tax with an equally progressive household consumption tax could increase national saving without redistributing the tax burden away from affluent households. # A CONSUMPTION TAX VERSUS A LABOR INCOME TAX It is sometimes asserted that a consumption tax is equivalent to a labor income tax (wage tax), but the claim of equivalence is incorrect. Although in some respects the two taxes are similar, in other respects they are different. # Similarities An income tax—due to its taxing of capital income—reduces the reward to saving. By contrast, neither a labor income tax nor a consumption tax reduces the reward to saving. A numerical example illustrates this point. Suppose you are considering devoting $1,000 of your gross (before-tax) labor income to saving for retirement. Assume the interest rate is 4% and there is no inflation. If there