\# 338 Glossary # comprehensive income A household’s consumption plus its increase in wealth (saving). Equivalently, the maximum the household could consume in a given year while holding its wealth constant. # conditional block grant A grant that gives the recipient a fixed dollar amount to spend on a specified activity. # consumption externality When an individual’s consumption affects the well-being of others but no compensation for this occurs. # consumption tax A tax that imposes a burden on a household according to its consumption spending. # contingent valuation Asking individuals hypothetical questions about how much they would be willing to pay to obtain the benefits of a project. # corrective subsidy A subsidy provided by the government to eliminate the inefficiency that occurs when there is a positive externality and the market produces too little of a particular good. # corrective tax A tax levied by the government to eliminate the inefficiency that occurs when there is a negative externality and the market produces too much of a particular good. Also called a Pigouvian tax. # corruption Illegal and unethical behavior that sacrifices the public interest for personal gain. # cost-benefit analysis Measuring the costs and benefits of a project to help decide whether to undertake the project and what scale the project should be. # cost-effectiveness Achieving a given objective at minimum cost. # cost-share The price that a family must pay per unit of a public good. # cost-sharing rate The percentage of a medical bill that the patient is required to pay. Also called the coinsurance rate. # credit-invoice method The method of computing value-added tax as equal to the tentative tax minus the tax credit. # deadweight loss The reduction in society’s welfare caused by the unfavorable change in the mix of goods when allocative efficiency does not hold. Also called efficiency loss, welfare loss, welfare cost, or excess burden. # debt The amount owed to others. Also called liabilities. # deductible Under health insurance, the first dollars of a person’s annual medical bill which the patient is responsible for paying. # defer To postpone payment. # deficit Spending minus taxes in a given year. # defined-benefit plan A retirement plan where a worker’s retirement benefit is linked by a formula to that worker’s pre-retirement wage history. # defined-contribution plan A retirement plan where a worker’s retirement benefits are paid from the sum that has accumulated in the worker’s account from designated contributions made by the worker and employer plus investment income (interest, dividends, and capital gains). # depreciation The annual cost of the wearing out of machinery. # disability insurance A federal program to assist people with career-ending disabilities. Part of Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI). # district power equalizing plan A school funding plan where the state designates a target property per pupil (a target tax base) and gives a grant to any district with property per pupil less than the target. Also called a guaranteed tax base plan. # earliest eligibility age (EEA) The earliest age at which a person can begin collecting monthly Social Security benefits. # Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) A refundable tax credit to provide assistance to low-income families that earn income by working. # effective tax rate The tax burden that a household bears as a percent of its income. # efficiency When both productive efficiency and allocative efficiency hold. Productive efficiency holds when producers minimize the cost of producing a product of a given quality. Allocative efficiency holds when producers allocate the optimal quantity of resources to the production of good X versus good Y.