\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes

| TABLE 8.5           | Total income                                 | $100,000 |
| ------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| Tax as a Percentage | Adjusted gross income (AGI)                  | $96,000  |
|                     | Taxable income                               | $70,000  |
|                     | Tax bracket (marginal tax rate)              | 25.0%    |
|                     | Tentative tax                                | $10,188  |
|                     | Tentative tax as a percent of taxable income | 14.6%    |
|                     | Final tax                                    | $8,188   |
|                     | Final tax as a percent of taxable income     | 11.7%    |
|                     | Final tax as a percent of AGI                | 8.5%     |
|                     | Final tax as a percent of total income       | 8.2%     |

The last $100 of income you earned is taxed at a 25% rate, and if you or your spouse would work more or earn more interest, the next $100 of income you earn (and every $100 after that until you reach the next tax bracket) would be taxed at a 25% rate. So your marginal tax rate (MTR) is 25%, and you can say you are in a 25% tax bracket. From Table 8.4 you can see that at higher incomes, the tax rate rises to 28%, then 33%, and finally 35%. Table 8.5 shows your tax as a percentage of your income. Your tentative tax ($10,188) is 14.6%, not 25%, of your taxable income ($70,000), because your first $16,050 of taxable income is taxed at 10% and your taxable income from $16,050 to $65,100 is taxed at 15%. Your final tax ($8,188) is 11.7%, not 14.6%, of your taxable income ($70,000), thanks to the tax credits. Your final tax ($8,188) is 8.5% of your adjusted gross income ($96,000) and 8.2% of your total income ($100,000). So although you are in a 25% tax bracket facing a marginal tax rate of 25% on your wage and interest income, your final tax is 8.2% of your total income. If you are asked the percentage of your income you pay in tax, you should answer 8.2%—even though you might also note that you are in a 25% tax bracket, so that on the last $100 you earned you paid $25. Suppose that you had $5,000 of investment income from corporate stocks—dividends or capital gains (if you buy stock for $2,000 and later sell it for $3,000, your capital gain is $1,000). In 2003, Congress enacted a maximum tax rate for dividends and capital gains of 15%. To determine your tentative tax, you would subtract your $5,000 of dividend and capital gains income from your $70,000 of taxable income, obtaining $65,000; you would apply the rates in Table 8.4 to your $65,000 and apply a maximum rate of 15% to your $5,000 of capital gains and dividends, and then add the taxes on the two components to get your total tentative tax. Thus, your maximum marginal tax rate on dividend and capital gains income is 15%, even though your marginal tax rate on wage and interest income is 25%. It is more accurate to say that you are in a (25%, 15%) tax bracket: You would pay 25% on the next $100 of wage or interest income, but only a maximum of 15% on the next $100 of capital gains or dividend income. # The Alternative Minimum Tax The alternative minimum tax (AMT) replaces the regular income tax for a subset of high-income households. The AMT was enacted several decades ago after it was discovered that some very affluent households managed legally to pay little or no income tax due to deductions, exemptions, and credits. The intent of the AMT is to make every very high-income household pay at least a minimum amount of tax even if that household would owe little or no regular income tax. A household must pay whichever...