\# Chapter 3 Public Goods and Political Economy is four times higher than the other’s. Then the government should make each family’s tax price (cost-share) proportional to its income—it should levy a proportional tax. With a proportional income tax, when the government provides a public good, it taxes a $120,000 income family four times the dollar amount that it taxes a $30,000 income family. Of course, the relationship between MB and income may not be proportional. If one family has four times the income of another, its MB curve may be eight times as high, or only twice as high, not four times a high. If eight times as high, then the government should make each family’s tax price rise faster than its income—when income is multiplied by 4, the tax should be multiplied by 8. This is called a progressive tax. If only twice as high, then the government should make each family’s tax price rise slower than its income—when income is multiplied by 4, the tax should be multiplied by 2. This is called a regressive tax. Thus, if the height of every family’s MB curve varies with its income, then exactly how it varies with income determines whether the optimal income tax is proportional, progressive, or regressive. It must be emphasized that by optimal, we mean solely with respect to the objective of achieving unanimous citizen support for the socially optimal quantity of the public good. In Chapter 8, “Income Taxes,” we will see that other objectives, such as fairness and incentives to work and save, should be taken into account when choosing whether to make an income tax progressive, proportional, or regressive. # Practical Obstacles Unfortunately, it is not obvious whether MB curves for a particular public good rise faster or slower than income, so we can’t be sure whether the government should choose a progressive, proportional, or regressive income tax just for the objective of achieving the socially optimal quantity of the particular public good with unanimous citizen support. Moreover, there may well be wide variation in the height of MB curves among families with the same income. Consider two families with the same income. One may be very concerned about a pirate raid and therefore have a high MB curve, while the other may be unconcerned about a pirate raid and therefore have a low MB curve. The government can’t vary a family’s tax according to its suspected concern. Even if the government were inclined to ask citizens about the intensity of their concern, citizens would have an incentive to understate it in order to be assigned a low tax. Dishonest citizens would understate their concern, so assigning taxes based on survey results would be unfair. The fact is that the government cannot know each family’s MB curve for a particular public good. Recall that this was a problem even with just three families, because each family had an incentive to understate its MB to the other two families in order to obtain a smaller cost-share. It would surely be a serious problem with many families. The best the government can do is use a very rough proxy for MB-like income. But more fundamentally, it is naive to simply assume that the government will want to achieve the social optimum or that it will want to assign cost-shares that win unanimous support among citizens for the social optimum. Who makes the government’s decisions? Is it a legislature (perhaps with the approval of the executive)? How are legislators elected? What is the impact of primary elections by political parties? Why is there log-rolling and pork-barrel legislation? Is there sometimes government failure, just as there is sometimes market failure? Is there sometimes government corruption? What is the impact of lobbying—by private interests or by government bureaucracies?