\# Chapter 11 Education appointed by elected local government office holders—operate public schools for local residents. Tuition is zero and all local residents are guaranteed admission; children are not subject to entrance exams and rejections. Most elementary schools are neighborhood schools open to all neighborhood residents, so neighborhood friends are guaranteed the opportunity to attend the same school. Financing is from taxes—partly local school district taxes and partly state taxes that are distributed by formula to local school districts. Local school districts raise most of their revenue from the property tax (which we examined in Chapter 10). States raise most of their revenue from sales and/or income taxes. Parents can choose to send their children to a private school but must then pay the private school’s tuition instead of receiving free public school education. This system is acceptable to many high-income parents because of a residential separation process. Many high-income people seek to live in high-income suburban towns with other high-income people. These towns enact zoning laws that limit low- and middle-income housing for owners and renters and thereby limit the number of nonaffluent people who can reside in the town. Thus, the school “admission process” is governed indirectly by residential zoning laws rather than directly by schools. Once a family is able to obtain residency in a town, it has passed the admissions “test” and is guaranteed admission to local public schools. Any high-income family that moves into the high-income town knows that most other children in the public schools will come from high-income families. Middle-income families then have to settle for mainly middle-income towns, leaving low-income families in low-income cities. Public schools in affluent towns feel substantial competitive pressure from public schools in other affluent towns and from private schools. If an affluent town’s public schools do a mediocre job, some affluent residents would move to other high-income towns and many others would send their children to private schools. Teachers and administrators in affluent public schools feel pressure to do a good job to avoid the layoffs that would result if parents send their children to private schools. By contrast, inner-city public schools that enroll low-income children feel little competitive pressure. Most low-income families are trapped in inner-city neighborhoods and are unable to afford housing in surrounding suburban towns. Moreover, low-income families cannot afford to send their children to private schools. So even if public schools do a poor job, few low-income children can exit. Teachers and administrators do not face the possibility of layoffs caused by the exit of children. # Public Schools plus a Refundable Tax Credit for Private School Tuition Under the current public school system, it would be possible to give low-income children the same ability to escape their local public school as high-income children. This could be achieved through a refundable tax credit that partially reimburses a low- or moderate-income family for tuition expense. The credit would be highest for low-income families (for example, 90% of tuition up to $6,000 of tuition) and phased down as income rises. If the tax credit is refundable, its full value would be available to low-income families that owe no income tax; they would file an income tax return and after processing, receive a check for the full value of the tax credit. With this refundable tax credit, low-income families as well as high-income families would have the option of private school. Public schools would still be favored because it would still cost a low-income family more to attend a private school than the public school (the tax credit would be less than 100%). However, the credit would make a private school affordable. Public schools in low-income neighborhoods would feel competitive pressure from private schools just as public schools do in high-income.