\# Chapter 3 Public Goods and Political Economy # Case Study The Politics of Subsidies and Tariffs In Chapter 2, “Externalities and the Environment,” we explained why economists support charging a price to polluters (either through a tax or tradable permits) and oppose giving clean alternatives a subsidy (either through direct payments or tax breaks). Here we elaborate on the role of lobbying and politics by looking at the case of ethanol. It should be emphasized that the same account could be written about many other subsidies and tariffs. Economists recommend charging producers of oil or gasoline a price that reflects its environmental cost and then letting ethanol compete with other clean alternatives in the marketplace without having the government subsidize any potential alternative or place a tax or tariff on any alternative. Ethanol is a clean alternative to gasoline that can be obtained from corn or sugarcane. The United States grows a lot of corn, and Brazil grows a lot of sugarcane. The political result has been that Congress has enacted a subsidy of about $1.00 a gallon for ethanol obtained from U.S. corn and placed a tariff of about $0.50 a gallon on ethanol obtained from Brazilian sugarcane. Producers, people, and politicians from U.S. corn-growing regions have worked hard politically to get Congress to enact both the subsidy and the tariff. They have argued that the ethanol subsidy helps the U.S. environment and energy independence and that the tariff is justified to offset the subsidy that Brazilian sugarcane producers receive from their government. Some environmental groups have lobbied for the subsidy but generally not for the tariff. Many individual Americans, whether they realize it or not, have a small loss imposed on them from the ethanol subsidy and tariff. The tariff raises the price of sugarcane ethanol from Brazil by about $0.50 a gallon and reduces the competitive effect of Brazilian ethanol on the price of U.S. ethanol and gasoline. The ethanol subsidy causes some reduction in the price of U.S. ethanol and gasoline to drivers, but taxpayers must make up for the revenue loss that results from the subsidy. Legislators are under pressure to raise funds to finance their campaigns, and special interests, not general interests, have an incentive and an ability to raise and offer campaign funds to legislators. It might seem desirable to reduce politicians’ dependence on raising funds for election campaigns. Various proposals for campaign finance reform have been proposed. For example, it has been proposed that campaigns be publicly financed through taxes.