\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes You produced this year is $200 (one-fifth of the purchase price), so each year you should be allowed to deduct $200. The cost of the wearing out of machinery is called depreciation. Under straight-line depreciation, you deduct $200 in each of the five years you use the machine. But suppose you’re not sure how long your machine will last? The IRS provides you with asset lives for categories of machines which prescribe how many years you must “write off” (or depreciate) your machine. # The Corporate Income Tax Suppose you incorporate your business—your business becomes a corporation. The owners of a corporation become shareholders, and they receive the important benefit of limited liability, which means they are not personally responsible for the debts of the corporation; the corporation is a legal entity separate from its individual owners. Nevertheless, it can be argued that the business income you earn in your corporation should be attributed to you and included in your household income for taxation, just as it would be if your business were a sole proprietorship or a partnership. If the corporation paid out all profit as dividends to its shareholders, then all corporate income would be included in the household income of shareholders. Most corporations, however, do not pay out all profit as dividends. Some corporations pay no dividends at all. Most retain a substantial portion of profit to finance investment in machinery and technology or to make portfolio investment (in bonds or stocks). Thus, if your household is taxed only on the dividends you receive, your business income (profit) that is retained and reinvested would escape household tax—in contrast to business income in proprietorships or partnerships. In theory, the proper thing to do would be to attribute (impute) all profit, whether paid out as dividends or retained, to shareholders and have each shareholder pay household tax on it. However, shareholders might object that they are not receiving cash with which to pay the tax on profit that is retained in the corporation. Although the same might be said of business income retained in a proprietorship or partnership, it can be argued that the choice to retain rather than pay out business income is clearly in the control of the proprietor or the partner. By contrast, shareholders in a corporation, especially a large one, often have little or no control over the share of profit that is paid out and the share that is retained. The argument, then, is similar to the argument about postponing tax on unrealized capital gains. Households who have not received any cash complain that it is unfair to be required to pay tax. # A Separate Corporate Income Tax An alternative way to prevent retained profit from escaping taxation is to have a separate tax on corporate income that the corporation, not shareholders, must pay. The corporation clearly has the cash if it retains the profit. This has been the approach taken by many countries, including the United States: a separate corporate income tax. A separate corporate income tax does not adjust its rate to the income of each shareholder. The current U.S. corporate income tax rate is 35%.9 By contrast, consider business income earned by two sole proprietorships: one whose owner is in a 15% tax bracket, the other in a 35% tax bracket. Each owner’s business income would be taxed at the appropriate bracket rate. By contrast, the tax rate for a corporation (35%) is not adjusted according to the tax brackets of its owners. Thus, a corporate income tax is an imperfect method of taxing the business income of shareholders. 9 The first dollars of a corporation’s income are taxed at a lower rate, but most corporate income is subject to the 35% rate.