\# Chapter 9 Consumption Taxes receives a 5% return that is equal to the firm’s investment return on the machine of 5%. Thus, in choosing how much to save, the person correctly expects a return equal to the firm’s investment return (5%) when there is a consumption tax, but correctly expects a return less than the firm’s investment return when there is an income tax (a 3% return if the income tax rate is 40%). Under a consumption tax, there is no efficiency loss in the choice between saving and consuming. However, the efficiency loss between leisure and work remains. Suppose you are considering giving up an hour of leisure and working another hour. An income tax reduces your after-tax wage income and, therefore, the consumption you can enjoy from working another hour. If you earn $100 of wage income and the income tax rate is 25%, then you can enjoy only $75 of consumption. Similarly, a consumption tax also reduces the consumption you can enjoy. Even though your $100 of wage income is not immediately taxed, when you go to the store and pay $100 at the cash register, if the sales tax is 33%, you will only obtain $75 of consumption because $25 is going for tax (the sticker price of the good is $75, so with a sales tax rate of 33% your tax is $25). Thus, a consumption tax, like an income tax, reduces the consumption you can enjoy when you sacrifice an hour of leisure, and therefore, it causes an efficiency loss. Look back at Figure 7.9 where the employer pays the worker a wage of $16, equal to the marginal revenue product of labor (MRPL), which is the dollar value of the additional output the worker produces in an hour. With the 25% income tax, the worker paid a tax of $4 and kept $12. To raise the same $4 of tax with a consumption tax would require a consumption tax rate of 33%; the worker would use the $16 wage income to consume $12 and then pay $4 of consumption tax ($4/$12 33%). Thus, when each of the 10 workers works his 2,000th hour, he will be able to consume only $12, even though he has generated a marginal revenue product of $16. Thus, like the income tax, the consumption tax drives a wedge ($4) between the MRPL the worker generates ($16) and the consumption he can enjoy ($12). To work the 2,000th hour, the worker requires only $12 to keep his utility constant, but he produces $16. It is wasteful that he didn’t work another hour, receive $12 to hold his utility constant, and have $4 of marginal revenue product distributed to others, making them better off. The same reasoning applies for additional hours until his marginal disutility (measured in dollars) rises to equal his marginal revenue product. The area of the triangle in Figure 7.9 measures the efficiency loss from the 33% consumption tax. But the consumption tax rate must be set above 33%, because the consumption tax must raise enough revenue to replace the revenue from not only the tax on labor income but also the tax on capital income. The tax wedge from the required consumption tax would be greater than $4, and the area of the efficiency loss triangle would be greater than shown in Figure 7.9 for the 25% labor income tax. Thus, replacing the income tax with a consumption tax would eliminate the efficiency loss in the choice between saving and consuming but would increase the efficiency loss in the choice between leisure and work.5 # Impact on the Distribution of the Tax Burden A switch from the current progressive income tax to either a retail sales tax or a value-added tax that raises the same total tax revenue would cause a redistribution of the tax burden away from high-income households. The reason is straightforward. In a given 5 Recall, however, the novel argument noted at the end of the section, “A Household Consumption Tax,” in which very high consumption by the affluent generates a negative externality that cascades down the social strata. If this argument is accepted, then a tax on very high consumption might actually increase efficiency by internalizing an externality.