\# 318 Public Finance “We owe this debt to ourselves” so there is no burden. But there is a burden to future U.S. taxpayers. Taxpayers at the time that the government borrows are better off, while future taxpayers are worse off. The good deal given to today’s taxpayers is offset by the bad deal given to tomorrow’s taxpayers. Government borrowing shifts the burden of today’s government spending from today’s taxpayers to tomorrow’s taxpayers. # INVESTMENT # Capital Expenditures Is it fair to shift the burden of today’s government spending? It depends. If today’s government spending benefits today’s but not tomorrow’s taxpayers, most would agree that the shift is unfair. But if today’s government spending primarily benefits tomorrow’s taxpayers, then most would agree that the shift is fair. Consider two examples. Suppose today’s government spending is a one-time cash transfer to today’s elderly (a one-time supplement to today’s Social Security benefits). Borrowing to finance the transfers would shift the burden to tomorrow’s taxpayers who receive no direct benefit from the transfers. By contrast, suppose today’s government spending is to repel an invasion by an aggressor nation or to build a highway that will last many years. Borrowing to finance these expenditures would shift the burden to tomorrow’s taxpayers who benefit from both expenditures; taxing rather than borrowing would unfairly place the entire burden on today’s taxpayers. Thus, borrowing is inappropriate when government spending doesn’t benefit tomorrow’s taxpayers, but appropriate when it does benefit them. This is sometimes expressed as the distinction between “current” expenditures and “capital expenditures.” Current (or operating) expenditures should be financed by taxation, but capital expenditures should be financed by borrowing. There is, however, a serious practical problem with this guideline. Politicians will try to classify any expenditure that they favor as a “capital” expenditure—an investment—that can be financed by borrowing rather than taxation. For many government expenditures, a good case can be made that the expenditure is an investment that will benefit future taxpayers, so that borrowing is appropriate. If the military buys a submarine, isn’t this an investment that will provide protection for many years? If government provides grants to college students, isn’t this an investment in human capital that will generate higher productivity for many years from these students after they graduate? If the government pays for medical care for poor children, isn’t this an investment in health capital that will raise the productivity of these children in school and later in the workforce? In fact, it is hard to think of any government expenditures that can’t be claimed to be an investment that yields returns in the future. However, if politicians are told they can borrow instead of tax, then politicians who advocate particular expenditures won’t face the discipline of having to raise taxes to pay for them. It seems likely that more expenditures will be enacted if they can be financed by borrowing rather than taxation. If it is feared that reclassification of government spending programs as “investments” will become widespread and that discipline on politicians will therefore be undermined, it may be better simply to prescribe that government expenditures (with perhaps a few exceptions) must be financed by taxation rather than borrowing, so that, ignoring exceptions, the budget must be balanced: Spending must not exceed tax revenue.