\# 330 Public Finance from members of the public (domestic and foreign) in the open market and pays with a check; the seller of the securities deposits the Fed’s check in its bank account and then has money to spend by writing checks (or the Fed will supply printed money to banks that request it if the depositor wants printed money to spend). Thus, due to this separation of powers, Congress and the president can only borrow from the public, not inject money into the economy. If Congress and the president can persuade the Federal Reserve to buy as many bonds from the public as the Treasury is selling to the public, then the federal government as a whole would really be injecting money to finance the excess of its spending over its taxes. But it must persuade the Fed. The seven members of the board of governors are appointed by the president with the approval of Congress for 14-year terms. The chairman serves for a four-year term and then must be reappointed to continue as chairman. It is therefore possible that the Fed may succumb to pressure from Congress and the president. The fact remains that because of the separation of powers, it is the Fed that controls money. Congress and the president cannot, without the Fed’s cooperation, inflate away the debt by printing money and injecting it into the economy. # Deficits and Inflation Thus far we have focused on how excessive debt gives the federal government a motive to generate inflation through a combined fiscal-monetary stimulus. Now we turn to a different question: Do deficits directly cause inflation? Suppose the economy is at full employment and the budget is balanced. Then spending is raised and/or taxes are cut, thereby raising aggregate demand for goods and services above supply, causing prices to rise. It is the excess demand that causes inflation, but the excess demand in this case has been generated by shifting the budget from balance to deficit, so it might be said that the deficit generated inflation. Clearly deficits do not have to generate inflation. Suppose again that the economy is at full employment and the budget is balanced. Then suppose a plunge in the stock market causes consumers and businesses to become anxious and cut their spending. This causes a fall in aggregate demand, output, employment, and income, and the economy goes into recession. The fall in income automatically reduces income tax revenue, so the budget goes into deficit, and the government must borrow to finance its spending in excess of taxes. In this case, aggregate demand decreases and prices rise more slowly—inflation decreases. Here the shift of the budget from balance to deficit is accompanied by less, not more, inflation. In the recessions of 1982, 1991, and 2001, budget deficits rose but inflation decreased. Therefore, it is more accurate to say that excess demand raises inflation and deficient demand reduces inflation. Shifting the budget from balance to deficit can cause excess demand and inflation, but deficient demand can cause a recession which reduces inflation and shifts the budget from balance to deficit. Thus, in one circumstance the deficit increases and inflation increases, while in another the deficit increases but inflation decreases. # THE LONG-TERM BUDGET OUTLOOK FOR THE U.S Over the past few years the U.S. federal budget deficit has been about 2% of GDP—the average over the past half century. Look back at Figure 1.11 in Chapter 1 to see that over the past few decades federal spending has ranged between 18% and 23% of