\# 268 Public Finance # GRANTS FROM A HIGHER GOVERNMENT TO LOWER GOVERNMENTS State governments give cash grants to local governments, and the federal government gives cash grants to state governments and to local governments. Grants from a higher government are an important source of revenue for lower governments; federal grants are important for state governments, and federal and state grants are important for local governments. # Purposes of Grants There are three main rationales for grants from a higher government to lower governments:

1. The existence of a positive externality
2. Achieving a goal of the higher government
3. Redistribution

First, a program or project undertaken by one local or state government may benefit people in another locality or state—a positive externality may exist. To induce local or state governments to undertake projects with external benefits, the higher government can provide matching funds to the local or state government. Second, a higher level of government may want a lower government to do more to achieve the higher government’s goal by increasing its spending on activity X. To induce lower governments to spend more on activity X, the higher government can give grants for spending on X. Third, the state or federal government is able to implement redistribution by taxing affluent suburbanites and transferring funds to low-income people in cities. The higher government can partly counter the effects of the separation process by which high-income people move away from low-income people. Also, the federal government can tax people in high-income states and transfer funds to people in low-income states. # Different Grants for Different Purposes The most effective grant for increasing spending on activity X is an open-ended categorical matching grant. For every dollar the recipient itself spends on activity X, the higher level of government (the grantor) will add m dollars for X. Open-ended means there is no limit (ceiling). An open-ended categorical matching grant reduces the price faced by the recipient. For example, if m is 1, then to get a unit of X that has a price per unit of $20, the recipient puts up only $10 and the grantor puts up $10, so the price has been reduced 50% ($10/$20); if m is 3, then to get a unit of X with a price per unit of $20, the recipient puts up only $5 and the grantor puts up $15, so the price has been reduced 75% ($15/$20).¹ By contrast, an unconditional block grant simply gives the recipient Z dollars to use however the recipient wants. Such a grant has only an income effect, not a price effect. When the recipient gets more income, it will spread the income among alternative spending and tax cut options including activity X, but it has no incentive to favor activity X. The unconditional block grant is a suitable instrument for redistributing. ¹ More generally, the price reduction is m/(1 + m); if m = 1, the price reduction is ½ (50%); if m = 3, the price reduction is ¾ (75%).