\# 16 Public Finance Services would be low—in particular, they would be unable to afford adequate health insurance and medical care. What, if anything, should the government do about this? One answer is that the government should not intervene, so that most youngsters will then learn that unless they work hard at school and pursue higher education or vocational training, they risk a life of low productivity, low wages, and low consumption. An absence of government assistance would create a strong incentive for youngsters to acquire the skills and productivity needed to escape poverty. Many citizens, however, believe that people who work hard and responsibly should receive enough income to escape poverty and obtain necessary medical care even if their productivity is low. To achieve this, some kind of government intervention is necessary. But what kind? The options are discussed in Chapter 12. First, the government can provide health insurance to low-income people. In fact, Medicaid—government health insurance for low-income people—is by far the largest expenditure for low-income families in the United States. Second, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)—a refundable tax credit that benefits even people who owe no income tax—increases the income of low-income workers without reducing job offers by employers, in contrast to an increase in the minimum wage. Third, other refundable tax credits can be used for education, health insurance, and saving. Fourth, most people who are laid off from their jobs receive unemployment compensation—cash benefits—from the government; persons physically or mentally unable to work often receive disability insurance, and persons injured on the job usually receive workers’ compensation. # PROBLEMS FOR THE GOVERNMENT When the free market works poorly, it is often the case that government intervention will work better, but not always. Government sometimes performs poorly when it attempts to remedy poor market performance. # Political Economy: Chapter 3 In Chapter 3 we ask how the government should make decisions concerning public goods. Once we examine what government should do, we then turn to how government actually behaves and makes decisions. The analysis of how government should and actually does make decisions concerning goods and services is sometimes called political economy. To examine this, in Chapter 3 we consider an imaginary island where the free market works well for most goods and services but does not provide adequately for the defense of the island against pirates. A wall surrounding the island can be built to protect against a pirate raid. But how thick should the wall be? The thicker the wall, the costlier it is to build, but the better it will protect against a pirate raid. How should the thickness of the wall be decided? Should there be voting? Should a unanimous vote be required or simply a majority vote? Taxes must be levied to pay for the cost of building a wall of a specified thickness. But how much tax should be assigned to each family? And how should this tax assignment be decided? While the island can teach many lessons about public goods and political economy, it is of course necessary to examine more realistic government problems and behavior. Chapter 3 next turns to the study of elections, logrolling among legislators, lobbying, special interests, government bureaucracies, political corruption, and the rationale for a constitution to restrain the legislature and the executive.