\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes # The Deduction for State and Local Tax Payments Advocates of an itemized deduction for state and local tax payments contend that these are involuntary payments that reduce the ability of a household to pay federal income tax. Suppose households A and B each earn $50,000 of income but live in two different states; household A pays $8,000 in state and local taxes, while B pays $2,000. Advocates say it’s fair to tax A on income of $42,000 and B on income of $48,000 because they differ in their ability to pay federal income tax. Opponents of this deduction contend that A is consuming $8,000 of public services, while B is consuming only $2,000; for example, if the taxes are property taxes that finance their children’s public schools, A’s children are consuming higher-quality public education than B’s children. Moreover, the difference in tax payments may be voluntary; for example, A may have chosen to live in its community because of a high-quality public school, while B may have chosen to live in its community because of its low property tax. Finally, the deduction causes excessive spending by state and local governments because every $100 spent costs local taxpayers less than $100 due to the reduction in their federal income tax. # The Deduction for Home Mortgage Interest Payments Advocates for a deduction for home mortgage interest payments contend that there is an external benefit to the community when a household owns its home rather than rents; for example, it takes better care of its home, and this benefits its neighbors. However, as explained in the section above on credits versus deductions, a refundable tax credit for a home purchase (whether financed by a mortgage or not) may be a fairer and more efficient way to encourage home ownership. # The Deduction for Medical Expenses in Excess of 7.5% of AGI Medical expenses that cost an excess of 7.5% of a household’s adjusted gross income and are borne by the patient (not an insurance company) impose an exceptional involuntary burden on the household. These expenses also cause a reduction in ability to pay federal income tax on a household that has suffered medical hardship. Again, a refundable tax credit may be better. # Personal Exemptions and the Child Tax Credit Advocates of personal exemptions and the child tax credit point out that a household with more children has more necessary expenses and therefore less ability to pay federal income tax. The personal exemption ($3,500 in 2008) and the child tax credit ($1,000) reduce the tax that a household must pay.8 The tax reduction from the exemption varies directly with the household’s tax bracket (for example, it’s $350 for a household in the 10% tax bracket and $875 for a household in the 25% tax bracket), while the tax reduction from the credit is the same ($1,000) for most households (except that the credit is nonrefundable, so the household’s benefit is limited to the amount of tax it would otherwise have owed, and the credit phases down for high-income households). Opponents note that the number of children is a voluntary choice; having more children is a form of consumption, and like other consumption, it should not reduce the federal income tax an adult should have to pay. 8 The personal exemption and the child tax credit phase down for high-income households.