\# Chapter 11 Education Consider the benefits for you and your child if your neighbors send their children to the neighborhood public school. Your child will be able to go to school with neighborhood friends. It will be easier to arrange after-school and weekend socializing for your child with school friends because they live nearby. You will be more likely to meet neighbors when you take your child to after-school and weekend recreation programs; the neighborhood school will promote friendships among neighbors and strengthen community bonds. You won’t have to apply to a private school and submit your child to an admissions process that may end in your child’s rejection from the same school that accepted his best friend. By contrast, if most of your neighbors send their children out of the neighborhood to private schools, then your child may be unhappy attending the neighborhood public school, and you may feel pressure to seek a private school. Thus, according to this argument there is a positive externality. When some parents choose to send their children to the neighborhood public school, they confer a benefit on other neighborhood parents and children. Whenever one person’s choice of X rather than Y benefits another person, economists say there is a positive externality and a subsidy to encourage the choice of X over Y may be warranted. What is the socially optimal tuition gap between public and private schools? It is possible that the optimal gap is the current one: public school tuition of zero and private school tuition equal to the full cost of private schooling. It is also possible that the optimal gap is, for example, half the current gap. There are two ways for the government to halve the current tuition gap. One way would be to set public school tuition equal to half of private school tuition. The other way would be to keep public school tuition zero but have the government reimburse half the tuition at a private school through a tuition tax credit or a voucher. # The Optimal Quality of a Public School Consider a town deciding on the quality of its public school. Higher quality requires a higher cost per child (higher salaries to attract higher-quality teachers, a higher teacher/pupil ratio, better computers and lab equipment, etc.). Whatever quality is chosen for the school will apply to all pupils. We can therefore use a diagram from Chapter 3 on public goods to examine this further. In Figure 11.1, the marginal cost (MC) curve indicates the marginal cost of each additional unit of quality. Each unit of quality costs $600, so the MC line is horizontal at a height of $600. Assume that there are only two families Y (young) and O (old) in the town. Each has a marginal benefit (MB) curve that indicates the maximum amount the family is willing to pay for another unit of quality. Suppose the height of the MBY curve is twice the height of the MBO curve, so at any level of quality the ratio MBY:MBO is 2:1; this means that for each unit of quality, family Y would be willing pay twice as much as family O. For example, at a quality of 10 units, MBY = $400 and MBO = $200. The ΣMB curve indicates the vertical sum of the MBs of the two families. For example, at a quality of 10 units, ΣMB = $600 ($400 + $200). The socially optimal quality, where the ΣMB curve intersects the MC curve, is 10 units. Why? Suppose quality is less than 10 units—for example, 8 units. Then it would be possible to make both families better off by raising quality. Starting from 8 units, suppose quality is raised by 1 unit and the cost is divided, so that Y pays $400 and O pays $200. From the diagram, each family’s MB would be greater than its cost-share (its share of the cost), so both families would be better off if quality were increased from 8 to 9 units; the same would be true from 9 to 10 units.