\# Chapter 3 Public Goods and Political Economy contribute to help others in need. Large sums are voluntarily donated to charities by some individuals, and many individuals donate something. Thus, it is certainly true that there would be substantial voluntary donations to finance many public goods. However, without taxes, some individuals would choose to be free riders—people who reason, “I’ll let others pay and then enjoy the benefits.” True, if everyone tries to free ride, there would be no public goods supplied because no one would be willing to pay for them. Yet each free rider reasons this way: “If others pay and I don’t, the public good will be supplied and I’ll benefit. But if I pay and others don’t, very little of the public good will be supplied and I’ll hardly benefit. So either way, I won’t pay.” Hence, even if many individuals would contribute something voluntarily, many would not contribute an adequate share of the cost and some would not contribute at all. Therefore, reliance on voluntary contributions would result in an underprovision of the public good. The standard approach to the free-rider problem is taxation. Since everyone benefits, everyone should be compelled to contribute. The compelling must be done by the government, and the compulsory payment is called a tax. Taxation has shortcomings. First, it is certainly true that some people would voluntarily contribute substantially to a national defense fund, and taxation will crowd out voluntary contributions; once government assumes responsibility for providing national defense and levies a tax, voluntary contributions to a national defense fund will surely dry up. Second, compulsion diminishes individual freedom; with compulsion, each household must pay its tax instead of having the freedom to decide how much to contribute to national defense. Third, an income tax reduces the reward to working more or saving more, because each person keeps less of what he earns for working or saving. Fourth, the legislative process by no means ensures that the socially optimal quantity of the public good will be provided. Fifth, taxation gives government power which might be used harmfully. On the other hand, there are three shortcomings to relying on voluntary contributions. First, while some would contribute substantially, some would not, so there would be underfinancing and underprovision of the public good. Second, it would be unfair: Contributors with a conscience would be taken advantage of by free riders; even among contributors, some would give a much larger percentage of their income than others. Third, it would be inefficient: There would be no satisfactory mechanism for achieving the socially optimal level of defense—the level that best balances its benefit against its cost. # Who Should Produce a Public Good? Notice that we have not said who should actually produce the public good—government or private firms. Once government raises the revenue through taxes, it then has the option of producing the public good with its own employees or purchasing the public good from private firms. Consider national defense: The government employs soldiers but purchases planes from private firms. It would be possible instead for the government to own and operate factories that use government employees to build planes. Thus, a public good, because of nonexcludability, must be financed by taxation and paid for by government. However, it may actually be produced by either government with its own employees or by private firms. Why does the government buy planes produced by private firms instead of producing its own planes? One reason is that there is a large market for planes in the private sector. Private airlines buy a large number of planes to serve a huge number of private airline passengers. Air travel is a private good—if you refuse to pay, you won’t be