\# 262 Public Finance Income rises relative to the home’s value. When the worker retires, income falls and property value is high relative to the retired occupant’s income. How might stage of life cycle affect a resident’s attitude toward a proposal to levy a high property tax to finance a high-quality public school system? The retired homeowner would not receive any direct benefit from the public school system (assume the children have moved away), and she has a high property value relative to current income, so if the retired homeowner considers only self-interest, she might well oppose the proposal. By contrast, the middle-age homeowner with children in the public schools is likely to support the proposal. Although a young homeowner would pay a tax that is high relative to current income, she will soon have children in the public schools, so despite the high tax, the young homeowner may support the proposal. How might stage of life cycle affect a resident’s attitude toward a proposal to switch from a property tax to an income tax that raises the same revenue from the locality? The retired homeowner and young homeowner would probably favor it because their current income is low relative to their property, while the middle-age homeowner would probably oppose it because current income is high relative to property. # Who Bears the Burden of a Residential Property Tax? Economists have considered three different approaches to analyzing the burden of a residential property tax: traditional, benefit, and capital. # The Traditional Approach According to the traditional approach, the property tax is a tax on a particular good—a home—and can be analyzed using a supply-demand diagram the same way we analyzed a tax on a good in Chapter 7. In the diagram, the vertical axis plots the price of a home. The suppliers are builders of new homes and owners of old homes, and the demanders are home buyers. With no tax, the price of a home is $250,000. If a property tax is levied, home buyers recognize that they will have to pay a tax annually. A tax on buyers shifts down the demand curve. The magnitude of the downward shift equals the present value of the taxes that the home buyer expects to pay while living in the home; for example, if the home buyer expects to pay $50,000 in property taxes while living in the home, then the buyer’s demand curve should shift down $50,000; the price the buyer is willing to pay the builder should fall $50,000 to enable the buyer to afford $50,000 in property taxes. As we saw in Chapter 7, the division of the burden between buyers and sellers depends on relative elasticities. In Figure 10.2(a), supply is steep (inelastic) and demand is flat (elastic); consequently, the $50,000 tax causes a $40,000 decrease in the price of a home from $250,000 to $210,000. In this case, $40,000 of the burden falls on home builders and owners, and only $10,000 of the burden falls on home buyers. In Figure 10.2(b), supply is flat (elastic) and demand is steep (inelastic); consequently, the $50,000 tax causes only a $10,000 decrease in the price of a home from $250,000 to $240,000. In this case, only $10,000 of the burden falls on home builders and owners, and $40,000 of the burden falls on home buyers. Thus, according to the traditional approach, property taxes are partly capitalized into the price of the home—the imposition of a property tax reduces the price of a home because buyers anticipate the taxes they will have to pay, and this shifts down the demand curve for homes.