\# Glossary **savings** An increase in wealth. Equivalently, income minus consumption. **separation process** The process where the affluent move away from the nonaffluent, the nonaffluent try to follow, but the affluent use zoning laws to maintain their separation. **single-payer plan** A health insurance plan with a single payer of all medical bills—the government. **social discount rate** The rate that should be used to compute the present value of a government project’s future benefits. **social insurance** Old-age insurance, health insurance, unemployment insurance, disability insurance, and workplace-injury insurance. **Social Security** A government program in which workers and employers pay payroll taxes each year to finance benefits to current retirees based on their wage histories. **Social Security Trust Fund** The fund into which Social Security payroll taxes are deposited and from which benefits are paid. **social security wealth** The wealth accumulated as workers work and pay Social Security taxes, thereby increasing the Social Security benefits to which they will be entitled when they retire. **socially optimal quantity** The quantity of a good that maximizes society’s welfare. **source-based taxation** Taxation of labor and financial capital employed in the city and goods purchased in the city regardless of where the workers, investors, and consumers reside. **standard deduction** An income tax deduction of a fixed amount. Subtracted from adjusted gross income. **subtraction method** The method of computing value-added tax as equal to the tax rate multiplied by the difference of sales revenue and purchases. **tax** A compulsory payment levied by the government. **tax bracket** A range of taxable income subject to a given marginal tax rate. **tax competition** Competition among local governments to cut business taxes to attract firms and jobs. **tax effort** The ratio of tax collections to tax capacity. **tax exporting** Levying taxes that burden outsiders. **tax-exclusive rate** A tax rate where tax is not included as part of the tax base; it is larger than the tax-inclusive rate (example: if price is $80, tax is $20, and the consumer pays $100, the tax-exclusive rate is $20/$80 = 25%). **tax-inclusive rate** A tax rate where tax is included as part of the tax base; it is smaller than the tax-exclusive rate (example: if price is $80, tax is $20, and the consumer pays $100, the tax-inclusive rate is $20/$100 = 20%). **Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)** A joint federal/state program that provides cash benefits to low-income families with children in which one parent is absent. **Tiebout process** Just as firms compete to attract and retain consumers, local governments compete to attract and retain residents by offering them a desirable mix of public goods and taxes. **total income** A household’s wage income plus investment income. **tradable** Able to be bought and sold at the market price. **transactions costs** The costs involved in organizing a class action suit and contacting the numerous parties to the suit. **turnover tax** A tax on the sales of all firms (not just retailers) with no deduction or credit for the firm’s purchases. **unconditional block grant** A grant that gives the recipient a fixed dollar amount to use however the recipient wants. **unemployment compensation** Cash benefits from the government to people who are laid off from their jobs. **unemployment insurance** A social insurance program that provides cash benefits to workers who are laid off from their jobs. Mandated by the federal government but administered by the states.