\# Public Finance than the original supply curve. By contrast, a dollars-per-unit tax, such as the gasoline tax, makes the new supply curve parallel to the original supply curve. With the 6% sales tax, when you buy an item with a sticker price of $100, $6 of sales tax is added, and you pay $106; the seller keeps $100 and sends $6 to the government. With the tax in effect, people buy the quantity QT. With no tax, they would have bought the quantity QN. What burden did the tax impose on you and other consumers? You need to know what you would have paid had there been no tax. Figure 7.2 shows your burden if demand is steep and supply flat; without the sales tax, you would have paid $101 (and the quantity with no tax would have been QN), so the tax made you pay $5 more ($106 instead of $101). Your burden due to the tax is $5, and the seller’s burden is $1 (without the tax, the seller would have kept $101; with the tax, the seller keeps $100). # A Tax on Wage Income Figure 7.3(a) shows a competitive market for labor. Employers are demanders and workers are suppliers. In the absence of a wage tax, the wage per hour would be $15. If a wage (payroll) tax of $4 per hour is levied on workers (suppliers) so that they must send a check for $4 per hour to the government, the supply curve would shift up $4 to S. At a wage of $16 an hour, for example, workers would now supply the same labor that they would have supplied at a wage of $12 when there was no tax. The labor market would therefore move to the intersection of the D curve with the new S curve. As drawn, the wage paid by employers would rise from $15 to $16 an hour (and the quantity of labor would fall from 100 to 95 hours). Workers would receive $16, pay a tax of $4, and keep $12. If instead the tax is levied on employers (demanders) so that they must pay the government $4 per hour, then as shown in Figure 7.3(b), the demand curve would shift down $4 to D. At a wage of $12 an hour, for example, employers would now demand the same labor they would have demanded at a wage of $16 when there was no tax. The labor market would therefore move to the intersection of the S curve with the new D curve. As drawn, the wage paid by employers would fall from $15 to $12 (and the quantity of labor would fall from 100 to 95 hours). Employers would pay a wage of $12 and a tax of $4. In both cases, workers keep $12 an hour, and the cost to the employer (wage plus tax) is $16 an hour (and the quantity falls from 100 to 95 hours). In both cases, workers bear a burden of $3 per hour, and employers bear a burden of $1 per hour. The division of the burden doesn’t depend on who pays the tax. It depends on the relative elasticities, and because, as drawn, supply is steep (inelastic) and demand is flat (elastic), the suppliers (workers) bear most of the burden. We could have obtained this result with the tax wedge shortcut shown in Figure 7.3(c). Start at the D/S intersection and move left until the vertical gap between D and S is $4 per hour—the tax wedge. The wage on the D curve is $16 so employers bear a $1 per hour burden. The wage on the S curve is $12, so workers bear a $3 per hour burden. # The Payroll Tax for Social Security Imagine you are an employee earning a daily wage of $100. The payroll tax rate for Social Security is 6.2% on your employer and 6.2% on you the employee, so your employer owes Social Security tax of $6.20 and you owe tax of $6.20. Under the law, your employer is required to take the amount you owe ($6.20) right out of your paycheck—so you receive $93.80—and send the $6.20 on your behalf along with the employer’s $6.20—a total of