\# Public Finance two parts—$65,000 and $5,000—and compute tax on each part separately because Congress has set a maximum tax rate on capital gains and dividends of 15%, while the maximum tax rate on other taxable income is 35%. Assume that your investment income consists solely of interest income, which is taxed just like wage income. Then there is no need to divide your $70,000 into two parts. You look up your tax in the 1040 tax table: Next to $70,000 of taxable income is $10,188 of tentative tax (the word tentative is not in the table—we explain our use of tentative in a moment). But how does the preparer of the table—the U.S. Treasury—arrive at your tentative tax? Congress has enacted the tax schedule shown in Table 8.4. For married couples filing jointly in 2008, the first $16,050 of taxable income is taxed at a 10% rate; taxable income from $16,050 to $65,100 is taxed at a 15% rate; and so on (the bracket dollar numbers are automatically adjusted with inflation each year): Thus, your tentative tax is calculated this way: .10($16,050) + .15($65,100 - $16,050) + .25($70,000 - $65,100) .10($16,050) + .15($49,050) + .25($4,900) $1,605 + $7,358 + $1,225 = $10,188 But $10,188 is only your tentative tax, not your final tax, because you can still subtract tax credits to which you are entitled. Because you have two children and the child tax credit is $1,000 per child, you can subtract $2,000. Note that having two children reduces your final tax in two ways. First, it gives you two personal exemptions ($3,500 per child). Second, it gives you two child tax credits. Your tax for the year is therefore $8,188. It is now time for a confession. If you look on your 1040 tax return, you will not see the phrase “tentative tax” anywhere. On your 1040 you will see the word tax, not tentative tax, to indicate the amount you find from the tax table. But the word tax is misleading. It seems to imply that this is what you pay—that there is no hope left for paying a smaller amount. That’s not true! Tax credits reduce the tax you must pay for the year, just as exemptions or deductions do. Humbly, we recommend to Congress that it instruct the IRS to put the phrase “tentative tax” on the 1040 and use the word tax for the final tax after the subtraction of tax credits. Now let’s return to Table 8.2 and your final tax of $8,188. Remember that you have already paid most of it because your employer and your spouse’s employer have been withholding income tax from your paychecks in your names and sending it to the IRS; the IRS has already collected $7,000 from you and your spouse. Hence, when you file your tax return, you should include a check to the U.S. Treasury for $1,188.2 Suppose instead that the IRS has already collected $9,000 from your household; then on your tax return you would request a refund of $812, and several weeks later, you would receive a U.S. Treasury refund check of $812.

| Taxable Income       | Tax Rate |
| -------------------- | -------- |
| $0 to $16,050        | 10%      |
| $16,050 to $65,100   | 15%      |
| $65,100 to $131,450  | 25%      |
| $131,450 to $200,300 | 28%      |
| $200,300 to $357,700 | 33%      |
| Over $357,700        | 35%      |
