\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency Based on empirical studies using time-series and cross-section data analysis, economists have found that it is important to distinguish between primary earners and secondary earners. If one person in a household earns substantially more wage income than anyone else, that person is the primary earner and anyone else who works is a secondary earner. Economists have generally found that most primary earners would not change their hours of work in response to the elimination of tax on wage income, but that secondary earners would sometimes increase their hours—particularly by deciding to work rather than not work. There are fixed costs that must be incurred when a person decides whether or not to work. For a secondary earner, it is often the cost of arranging for child care. If the after-tax wage increases, it may pay to incur this cost; hence, eliminating a tax on wage income may cause some secondary earners to decide to work. From these econometric studies, the following rough estimate has emerged. If the after-tax wage of a primary earner increases 10%, hours of labor supplied increases only about 1%. Another way to say this is that the elasticity for primary earners is only about 0.1 (1%/10%), where the elasticity is defined as the ratio of the percentage change in hours supplied (1%) to the percentage change in the after-tax wage (10%). Hence, the labor supply of primary earners is very inelastic. By contrast, if the after-tax wage of a secondary earner increases 10%, hours of labor supplied increases about 5%. In other words, the elasticity for secondary earners is about 0.5 (5%/10%). Hence, labor supply is not as inelastic for secondary earners as for primary earners. For primary earners, the S curve in Figure 7.4 is nearly vertical so that primary earners bear nearly the entire burden of the combined (employer plus employee) 12.4% payroll tax for Social Security. # A Tax on Capital Income Figure 7.5 shows a competitive market for saving. Firms (borrowers) are demanders and households (lenders) are suppliers. Firms borrow saving, invest in machinery, and from the return on machinery, they pay the savers (lenders) interest income (capital income). On the vertical axis is the rate of return r. As drawn, the saving supply curve has a positive slope—the higher the rate of the return, the more the households save. In the absence of a tax, the rate of return would be 4%. Consider the last $100 saved at the intersection point. A firm borrows the $100 and uses it to make an investment in a

| FIGURE 7.5 | A Capital Income            | Tax on Savers |
| ---------- | --------------------------- | ------------- |
|            | The supply curve shifts up. |               |
| 5%         |                             | S'            |
| 4%         |                             | S             |
| 3%         |                             | D             |
|            | ST                          |               |
|            | SN                          |               |
| Saving     |                             |               |
