\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency The dollar amount that the worker would need to be compensated to keep his utility constant if he worked an additional hour equals the height of the labor supply S curve (the height up to point A, $12). This hour of work would have produced an MRPL equal to the height of the D curve (the height of point B, $16), so the “surplus” marginal product (the vertical gap between D and S, which is BA, $4) could have been distributed to others, making them better off. It’s also wasteful that all the additional hours from 20,000 to 22,000 were not worked—22,000 is where the height of the S curve finally equals the height of D (the MRPL).7 The sum of the net gains to society that could have occurred by increasing the quantity of hours from 20,000 to 22,000 equals the area of the shaded triangle: ½(base height) = ½($4 \* 2,000) = $4,000. The base (vertical) of the triangle equals the tax per hour T, and the height (horizontal) equals the change in hours H. The triangle shows the net loss in society’s welfare due to the tax: Efficiency loss = area of triangle = ½T(H) The total burden of the tax is the revenue rectangle plus the BAD triangle. The area of the revenue rectangle is $4 \* 20,000 = $80,000. In this example the ratio of the excess burden to the direct burden is $4,000/$80,000 = 5%. Thus, when $100 of revenue is raised, there is an additional burden of $5, so the total burden is $105. As in the case of the tax on a good, the efficiency loss is proportional to the square of the tax: If the tax were doubled, the base and the height of the triangle would double, so that its area—equal to the efficiency loss—would quadruple. Look again at Figure 7.9. Imagine the S and D curves were steeper (less elastic). Then for a particular tax wedge ($4), the efficiency loss triangle would be smaller. Once again:

* The less elastic (steeper) the D and S curves, the smaller the efficiency loss from a tax.
* The elasticity of labor supply is defined here as the ratio of the percentage increase in hours supplied (%ΔH) over the percentage increase in the wage (%ΔW):

**Elasticity of Labor Supply:** ⬅ (%ΔH)/(%ΔW). For example, if hours supplied increases by 5% when the wage increases by 10%, then the elasticity of labor supply is 0.5. As shown in the footnote8, if the demand curve in Figure 7.9 were horizontal, the area of the triangle would equal L = ½t² WH where t is the tax rate (t equals T/W) and ε is the labor supply elasticity.9 According to this formula, if the tax rate t doubles, the efficiency loss L quadruples; also, the lower the elasticity, the smaller the efficiency loss. Since tax revenue R equals 7 A technical point: The S curve in Figure 7.9 is the compensated supply curve. An explanation is given in the appendix to this chapter. 8 The area of the triangle L = ½T(H). By definition (ΔH/H)/(ΔW/W), so ΔH = (ΔW/W)H. Since W = T, ΔH = (T/W)H = tH. Then L = ½T(tH) = ½(T/W)(tWH) = ½t(tWH) = ½t² WH. 9 If the demand curve slopes down as shown in Figure 7.9, then the formula is more complicated and includes the demand elasticity as well as the supply elasticity. A technical point: The ε in the formula is the compensated labor supply elasticity as explained in the appendix to this chapter.