\# Chapter 12 Low–Income Assistance # FIGURE 12.2 The EITC For a family with two children, the phase-in rate is 40%, the maximum EITC is $4,800, and the phase-out rate is 20%.

| EITC benefit |         | 40%     | 20% |
| ------------ | ------- | ------- | --- |
| $12,000      | $16,000 |         |     |
| $4,800       |         |         |     |
|              |         | $40,000 |     |

As earnings increase, the benefit increases until a maximum benefit is reached. After a brief flat range, as earnings increase, the benefit is phased out. Figure 12.1(b) shows a welfare schedule: When earnings are zero, the benefit is at its maximum; after a brief flat range, as earnings increase, the benefit is phased out. The EITC encourages and rewards working rather than not working; when a person who was not working goes to work, the EITC raises the reward from working. By contrast, welfare does not encourage or reward work: The benefit is at its maximum amount when a person doesn’t work, and working reduces the benefit. Figure 12.2 shows the EITC schedule (using rough, round numbers) for a married couple with two or more children. The family receives an EITC of $40 for each $100 of wage income it earns (the phase-in rate is 40%) until its wage income reaches $12,000 and its EITC benefit reaches $4,800. As its income increases from $12,000 to $16,000, its EITC stays $4,800. Further family income beyond $16,000 causes a phaseout of the credit; the credit is reduced $20 for every additional $100 of income the family obtains (the phase-out rate is 20%), so that the credit falls to zero when the family’s income reaches $40,000. Note that the credit phases in over an income range of $12,000 at a phase-in rate of 40% and phases out over an income range of $24,000 (from $16,000 to $40,000) at a phaseout rate of 20%. If the family has one child, the phase-in rate is 34% (instead of 40%), the maximum credit is about $2,900 (instead of about $4,800), and the phase-out rate is 16% (instead of 20%). If a household has no children, there is a small EITC for persons between the ages of 24 and 65 (thereby excluding most college students and retirees); the phase-in rate is only 7.65% (chosen to offset the employee payroll tax which is 6.2% for Social Security and 1.45% for Medicare), the maximum credit is a bit over $400, and the phase-out rate is also 7.65%. # History of the EITC The Earned Income Tax Credit was enacted in 1975. Under the original version, a household with at least one child received a supplement of 10% of its wage earnings until earnings reached $4,000 and the credit reached $400; then for each $100 of income above $4,000, the credit was reduced $10, so that the credit completely phased out when household income reached $8,000. By comparison, today for a household with two children, the phase-in rate is 40%, not 10%, and the maximum credit is $4,800, not $400.