\# 322 Public Finance raise planned spending if they are willing to raise planned taxes, and they can only cut planned taxes if they are willing to cut planned spending. Note that NUBAR would permit Congress to enact an automatic fiscal stimulus that would be triggered by recession and removed by recovery. For example, suppose Congress enacts a stimulus package of tax cuts and spending increases that would be triggered automatically whenever the unemployment rate exceeds the normal unemployment rate by a full percentage point and be terminated when the unemployment rate falls below this threshold. For example, if the normal unemployment rate (the average of the preceding decade) were 5.2%, then the stimulus package would be triggered as soon as the Department of Labor announces that the monthly unemployment has risen above 6.2% and would be terminated when the unemployment rate falls below 6.2%. In judging whether the planned budget complies with NUBAR, the technicians would ignore the stimulus package because it would not be in effect next year if the unemployment rate is normal. Thus, NUBAR does not prevent Congress from using fiscal policy to combat a recession, provided the fiscal stimulus would be removed if the unemployment rate declines to normal. Several questions can be raised about NUBAR. First, how would it be implemented? Congress would need to adopt a planned budget in its entirety and get approval from the CBO technicians instead of just voting on individual components of spending and taxes. Second, how would it be enforced? Suppose Congress fails to adopt a planned budget that is in compliance with NUBAR. Would the penalty simply be bad publicity for Congress, or would Congress have to accept an across-the-board X% cut in the planned spending of each program; if so, would there be exceptions for any programs? Third, would there be a provision to suspend NUBAR in case of a severe recession or a war? # FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS # Fiscal Imbalance The debt of a family, business, or government is an explicit obligation that must be managed in the future. But it would be misleading to look only at debt to assess the fiscal prospect of the family, business, or government. Consider two families. The first has only one child, and it has decided that the child will attend the state university where the family lives and therefore pay a low tuition for college. The second has five children, and it has decided that all the children will attend private universities and therefore pay high tuition for college. Clearly, the second family faces a much more challenging future fiscal burden than the first. Its decision to send all five children to high-tuition private universities means that it has incurred a large implicit obligation. Suppose the explicit debt incurred by the two families is the same. It would clearly be wrong to conclude that they face the same future fiscal burdens. The same logic applies to a government. Consider Social Security and Medicare. The federal government has scheduled cash benefits determined by a formula when workers retire, and the payment of retirees’ medical bills. These scheduled benefits and bill payments are much larger than the tax revenue that it is estimated will be raised by current payroll tax rates (given projected ceilings on taxable payroll). The federal government has therefore undertaken an implicit obligation that is much larger than the taxes it has assigned to the task of meeting the obligation. This gap between scheduled benefits and assigned taxes is called the fiscal imbalance of each of these two programs. More precisely, the fiscal imbalance is defined