\# 92 Public Finance difficult that some are inclined to say they oppose any kind of cost-benefit analysis for these questions. But what is the alternative? If someone says that “life is priceless” and weighing cost is “immoral,” then any treatment X that might save any lives would always be approved. But the resources absorbed by treatment X then cannot be used to save lives through treatment Y; nor can the resources be used in other ways to make life better for people. So the issue is not life versus money. Resources used here cannot be used elsewhere—resources have an opportunity cost. The issue is how best to use resources to promote the well-being of people. Economists contend that some kind of cost-benefit analysis, despite its difficulties, is a useful tool to help allocate resources to promote such well-being. # INTERVENING MILITARILY Should a particular military intervention be undertaken? The answer should be based on weighing the cost of the intervention against its benefit—in other words, on a cost-benefit analysis. Of course, the answer cannot be given solely by economic analysis. Evaluating the benefit of the particular military intervention must rely heavily on the disciplines of history, international relations, political science, and military science. However, economics can contribute to an evaluation of the cost of a particular military intervention. When a military intervention is being contemplated, it should matter to the citizenry whether the cost is estimated to be $150 per person or $6,000 per person. A citizen may support the intervention if its estimated cost per person is $150, but she might oppose the intervention if its estimated cost per person is $6,000. Yet quite often there is little serious analysis or discussion of the estimated cost per person prior to a military intervention. Moreover, even when an aggregate analysis is done, it is seldom translated into a cost per person so that each citizen can ask herself, “Am I personally willing to bear this $X burden—that is, to give up $X of consumption of goods and services?” The economic cost of a military intervention is much larger than the military budgetary cost that is incurred during the war. There are the costs of the lives lost and the suffering of veterans who must live with serious injuries. There are the medical costs and disability payments to veterans that will occur for many years. If the war is financed by borrowing instead of taxes, there are interest costs. There is the cost of replacing military hardware destroyed during the war. The war may raise the price of a valuable resource such as oil. The best way to appreciate the complexity of applying cost-benefit analysis to a military intervention is to examine an actual example. The box titled “The 2003 U.S. Military Intervention in Iraq” shows cost-benefit analysis in practice.