\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment # Case Study: A Carbon Tax versus a Carbon Cap and Trade Program At a conference in Washington, D.C., in October 2007 hosted by the Hamilton Project of the Brookings Institution, two economists presented papers advocating two different carbon price policies for reducing carbon emissions in the United States. Professor Robert Stavins of Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government advocated a carbon cap and trade program, and Professor Gilbert Metcalf of Tufts University, a carbon tax.\* Stavins makes these arguments for preferring cap and trade to a tax. First, any new tax meets stiff political resistance. Second, if some permits are given out free, recipients may politically support rather than oppose the program. Third, some upstream carbon firms may successfully lobby for partial or full exemption from a tax. Fourth, cap and trade is more certain to hit the pollution reduction target than a tax—this fact appeals to environmentalists. Fifth, the European Union countries are adopting cap and trade so harmonization will be easier if the United States does too. Metcalf makes these arguments for preferring a tax to cap-and-trade. First, historically cap and trade programs have given permits out for free and not collected revenue that can be used to reduce other taxes. Second, there will be wasteful political lobbying by firms for free permits. Third, the administration of a tax is time-tested, whereas administering cap and trade is a new challenge. Fourth, in the short run it is more important to avoid excessive abatement cost than excessive emissions because there is plenty of time to adjust emissions before global temperature is affected. Fifth, cap and trade has the volatility of stock market prices which can disrupt planning. The government should pay the going carbon price to any downstream carbon emitter who captures and sequesters carbon gas instead of releasing it to the atmosphere. A gallon would reduce carbon emissions in the United States about 15%. The prices of all goods that use a lot of carbon fuel in their production would rise relative to the price of goods and services produced with little carbon fuel, providing an incentive to reduce the use of carbon fuels. Carbon tax revenue would be recycled by cutting other taxes and sending households cash transfers. To minimize the cost of reducing global warming, all countries should implement the same carbon tax. This important point can be seen by reinterpreting Figure 2.5 as applying to two firms L and H in two countries. With no tax, L and H each emit 50. If each country imposes a $40 carbon tax, then L would cut back 40 and emit 10, while H would cut back 10 and emit 40, so total emissions would be cut from 100 to 50. The MAC of the last unit cut back by L would equal the MAC of the last unit cut back by H (each MAC would equal $40, the tax) so the total cost of cutback is minimized. How much more would it cost if H alone cut back 50 instead of H cutting back 10 and L cutting back 40? If H cuts back 50, the last unit cut back has an MAC of $200, so the average MAC would be ½ ⫻ $200 ⫽ $100. Thus, the total cost of H cutting back 50 would equal 50 ⫻ $100 ⫽ $5,000. By contrast, if H cuts back 10 and L cuts back 40, the last unit each cuts back would have an MAC of $40, so the average MAC. \*The papers are available at the Hamilton Project Web site, <http://www.brookings.edu/projects/hamiltonproject.aspx>.