\# 150 Public Finance Doctors, and drugs. The cost of Medicaid has risen at a rapid rate, and efforts are continuously being made to try to devise methods to slow cost growth while still ensuring access to medical care for poor people. # Alternative Public Policies for Working Families A variety of public policies have been proposed to improve health insurance coverage for working people and their children. In this section we consider several of them. # Consumer-Driven Health Care and Health Savings Accounts Advocates of consumer-driven health care contend that the free market can work in health care if each consumer bears more of the cost of her own medical care. They would like to see more consumers choosing catastrophic insurance with substantial patient cost sharing for normal medical bills. Advocates contend that if consumers pay most of the price of medical care most of the time, they will monitor the health care market the way consumers do for other goods and services. One way to try to induce a switch to catastrophic insurance would be to remove the tax advantage for insurance with high premiums and low patient cost sharing. Another would be to introduce a tax advantage for catastrophic insurance. A tax advantage for catastrophic insurance was enacted in 2003 as part of the Medicare Modernization Act, though it has nothing to do with Medicare. Here is how it works. If a family obtains an insurance policy with at least a $2,000 deductible—so the family must bear the first $2,000 of medical expenses out of pocket—then it will be given a tax advantage. The tax advantage is that the employer can deposit an amount up to the deductible ($2,000) into an account for the employee called a health savings account (HSA) and no tax (income or payroll) must be paid on this $2,000 compensation, either when it is deposited or when it is used by the employee to pay medical bills. Any funds not used can accumulate in the HSA tax-free. HSA funds will only be taxed if withdrawn to finance nonmedical expenditures. It is too early to know whether this new tax advantage will gradually cause many employers and individuals to shift from high-premium insurance to catastrophic insurance. # Responsible Health Insurance A plan called responsible health insurance (RHI) has been proposed by economists Mark Pauly, Patricia Danzon, Paul Feldstein, and attorney John Hoff. Other health policy analysts have proposed some or all of its components; recently, Massachusetts enacted a health insurance plan that contains one key element of RHI. As explained below, RHI would cover all people of working age (and their children) regardless of income, so it would replace Medicaid (and SCHIP) for nonelderly low-income people. RHI has three elements: (1) a requirement (mandate) that each household obtain insurance; (2) a refundable tax credit; and (3) provision of fallback (last-resort) insurance. The prevention of free riding is the rationale given by the RHI authors for an individual mandate. With a mandate, a person would no longer have the option of being a free rider. 3 An exposition of this approach by economists is given in John Cogan, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Daniel Kessler, *Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Five Steps to a Better Health Care System* (American Enterprise Institution Press, 2005). 4 Mark Pauly, Patricia Danzon, Paul Feldstein, and John Hoff, *Responsible National Health Insurance* (American Enterprise Institute Press, 1991).