\# 264 Public Finance unaffected, the home price would be unchanged, and home builders would bear no burden. In the example, if the home price stays at $250,000, the homeowner bears a $50,000 burden from the $50,000 property tax but receives an equal benefit from the free public schools. In effect, the tax makes the home buyer pay for the school benefit. Thus, according to the benefit approach, property taxes are partly capitalized into the price of the home, but benefits of the public services that are financed by the property tax are also partly capitalized into the price of the home. The imposition of a property tax in itself would reduce the price of a home because buyers anticipate the taxes that they will have to pay, and this would shift down the demand curve for homes. The public services that the tax finances would raise the price of a home because buyers anticipate the benefits that they will enjoy from free public services. # The Capital Approach According to the capital approach, individuals in the economy can accumulate capital (i.e., wealth) in different forms (e.g., savings accounts, stocks, bonds, land, buildings, homes, and other durables) and in different locations. A local property tax is a tax on accumulating capital in a particular form—a home. Individuals who view their home as an investment will channel their accumulation of capital away from forms and locations that are heavily taxed and into forms and locations that are lightly taxed. Note that as capital moves into forms and locations that are lightly taxed, the increase in supply should drive down the return earned by the owners of lightly taxed capital. Thus, property taxes end up burdening owners of all forms of capital in all locations. Most economists think that there is some merit to each of the three approaches; some economists emphasize one approach more than the others. # Do Renters of Housing Bear a Burden from the Property Tax? Individual homeowners are very aware of their property tax burden because of the large payment they must make each year to the tax collector of their local government. By contrast, renters who live in apartment buildings do not have to make such a payment to the tax collector. Some renters may therefore think that a local property tax imposes no burden on them. But the owners of rental apartment buildings are subject to the property tax and must make an annual payment. If the property tax on owners of apartment buildings causes the owners to raise rents, then renters would bear some of the burden. According to the traditional approach, the property tax is a tax on a particular good—an apartment building—and can be analyzed using a supply-demand diagram the same way we analyzed a tax on a good in Chapter 7. In the diagram, the vertical axis plots the apartment rent. The suppliers are apartment owners and the demanders are renters. With no tax, the rent is $1,000 per month. If a property tax is levied, building owners recognize that they will have to pay a tax. A tax on owners shifts up the supply curve because it raises the cost to the owners. The magnitude of the upward shift equals the monthly tax per apartment. For example, if the building owners expect to pay $200 per month per apartment, then the supply curve should shift up $200. As we saw in Chapter 7, the division of the burden between buyers and sellers depends on relative elasticities. In Figure 10.3(a), supply is steep (inelastic) and demand is flat (elastic); consequently, the $200 tax causes only a $50 increase in the rent. In this case, $50 of the burden falls on the renter and $150 on the building owner. In Figure 10.3(b), supply is flat (elastic) and demand is steep (inelastic); consequently,