\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes After-tax return reduces saving and investment, it will reduce the productivity of labor and the wage (see Figure 7.6) so some burden may fall on workers. Under the U.S. corporate income tax, a U.S. multinational corporation is taxed on its income wherever that income is earned. A U.S. corporation with a factory located abroad, however, is usually taxed by the foreign government on the income generated within its borders. To avoid double taxation, the U.S. corporate income tax gives a U.S. corporation a foreign tax credit for taxes paid to foreign governments. For example, if a U.S. corporation earns $100 million abroad and the foreign government levies a 25% tax on this income ($25 million), then although its tentative U.S. corporate income tax is 35% ($35 million), it obtains a foreign tax credit of $25 million so that it only has to pay the U.S. government $10 million. A further advantage is also given: deferral of tax until repatriation. This corporation does not have to pay the U.S. government $10 million until the income earned abroad is returned—repatriated—to the United States. # The Estate Tax Although the estate tax is not a tax on capital income, it is discussed here because it is a tax on the capital (wealth) that a person holds at death, and the argument is sometimes made that the estate tax is a double tax on capital income that has already been taxed under the income tax. When a person dies, should the person’s bequest—the estate (i.e., wealth) that will be given to heirs—be subject to taxation? Most agree that as long as the person’s spouse is alive to receive the bequest, there should be no tax. However, suppose the spouse has already died, so that the bequest would go to children, grandchildren, and/or other individuals named by the person in a will. Should the estate of such a deceased person be subject to taxation? Should the amount of tax depend on the wealth of the deceased person or the income of the heirs (i.e., recipients)? If there is an estate tax, should it apply only to the largest estates, or should it apply to a substantial share of estates? Taxing a person’s wealth after the person dies raises a more basic question. Why not tax the person’s wealth annually or at least periodically (say, every five years) while the person is alive? Why tax a person’s wealth only at death? Opponents of the estate tax have called it the “death tax,” and they say that death should not be a taxable event. Few opponents of the estate tax support annual or periodic taxes on a person’s wealth while the person is alive. Most opponents of the estate tax also oppose taxing wealth because they believe that holding wealth should not be a taxable event—during life or at death. Should it? Levying an estate tax leads to levying a tax on the giving of gifts before a person dies, because without a gift tax an older person would have an incentive to give away her estate to heirs before she dies. The United States, since 1976, has a unified transfer tax that coordinates the taxation of a person’s estate at death with gifts given to heirs prior to death. # The U.S. Estate and Gift Tax Under the U.S. estate tax, a person’s gross estate includes all property owned by the person who died—such as stocks, bonds, and housing—minus any debt outstanding, plus gifts given during the person’s lifetime. To help preserve family businesses and farms, these are valued at less than their fair market value. Then certain deductions are allowed before obtaining the taxable estate. The amount given to a spouse is deductible; no matter how large the estate, there is no tax if it is given to a spouse. The amount given to charity during life and at death is deductible; no matter how large the estate, there is no tax if it is given to charity. Annual gifts of up to $12,000 per recipient are...