\# Chapter 9 Consumption Taxes Consider a household that produces a lot but consumes a little. Such a household leaves a large share of what it produces for others to consume or businesses to invest (which in the future raises the productivity of other workers). Shouldn’t such a household, asks the consumption tax advocate, be subject to a lower tax than the household that consumes as much as it produces, leaving nothing for others to consume or businesses to invest? An income tax advocate would reply that a household’s ability to pay is measured by its income, not its consumption. The household that earns a lot can afford to pay a high tax even if it consumes a little. Moreover, the household enjoys a feeling of security and peace of mind from the income that it saves. Consider two households that have the same consumption, but one has twice the income of the other; the household with twice the income enjoys the same consumption as the other but also enjoys a feeling of security. # The Grasshopper and the Ants One of Aesop’s best-known fables is “The Grasshopper and the Ants.” The ants restrain their consumption of food in the summer, let the crop grow larger into the fall, and then store it for the winter. The grasshopper, on the other hand, consumes the entire crop in the summer, storing nothing for the winter (in the memorable Disney cartoon portrayal, the grasshopper sits around during the summer, playing the fiddle and singing, “O the world owes me a livin’!”). When winter comes, the grasshopper faces starvation while the ants have sufficient food. Imagine two persons, Ant and Grasshopper, who earn the same wage in the summer. Ant consumes half his wage, saves the other half, and earns income on his saving, so he can consume more than half of his summer’s wage in the winter. Grasshopper consumes his entire wage in the summer and has nothing left when winter comes. What is the fair way to tax these two persons? They have the same opportunity: They earn the same wage and therefore have the same ability to consume and save. Shouldn’t they pay the same tax? Under a labor income tax, they would pay the same tax, but under an income tax, Ant would pay more tax over the year: Ant and Grasshopper would pay the same tax in the summer because their wage is the same, but Ant would also pay a tax in the winter on his capital income from saving. Is it fair to tax Ant more than Grasshopper just because Ant makes a different choice—many would argue, a more responsible choice—about how to use his summer wage? How would Ant and Grasshopper be treated under a consumption tax? Ant pays less tax in the summer than Grasshopper does, but Ant pays a tax in the winter while Grasshopper doesn’t. Consider the numerical example in Table 9.7. Suppose Ant and Grasshopper each earn a summer wage of $1,000 and the consumption tax rate is 25%. In the summer Grasshopper consumes $800 and pays $200 in tax, while Ant consumes $400 and pays $100 in tax; Ant saves $500 which earns interest income of $250 because the interest rate r is 50%. In the winter, Ant consumes $600 and pays $150 in tax.

| Summer      | Wage   | Consumption | Tax  | Saving | Interest | Consumption | Tax  | PV of Taxes |
| ----------- | ------ | ----------- | ---- | ------ | -------- | ----------- | ---- | ----------- |
| Grasshopper | $1,000 | $800        | $200 | $0     | $0       | $0          | $0   | $200        |
| Ant         | $1,000 | $400        | $100 | $500   | $250     | $600        | $150 | $200        |
