\# Public Finance Suppose, as shown in Figure 12.2 in the text, that the EITC has a phase-in rate of 40% until earnings reach $12,000 and the EITC reaches $4,800. Then for each hour of leisure she gives up for work, she gets a wage of $10 plus an EITC of $4 for a total of $14 per hour. The slope of her budget line MF is –$14, and she chooses point F with 7,760 hours of leisure per year, so she works 1,000 hours per year and earns $10,000 of income plus $4,000 of EITC. Note that if she had worked 200 hours more for a total of 1,200 hours, she would have reached point D, earned $12,000 plus an EITC of $4,800 for a total of $16,800; point D is the end of the EITC phase-in range; from point D to point E the EITC is constant (see Figure 12.2), and the EITC budget line is therefore parallel to MN. To the left of E, the EITC phaseout causes the EITC budget line to be flatter than MN. To summarize: The EITC causes this individual to choose to move from point O to point F, thereby increasing her hours of work per year from 500 to 1,000, her earnings from $5,000 to $10,000, and her earnings plus EITC from $5,000 to $14,000. For this person, point F is to the left of point O—in response to the EITC, she chooses less leisure and more work. It should be noted that for another individual with other indifference curves, it is possible that the point F she chooses would be much closer to point M on the EITC budget line and actually to the right, not left, of point O; such a person would choose more leisure and less work in response to the EITC. It must be admitted that while the EITC is likely to increase hours of work for a person in its phase-in range, the reverse is possible. Also note that this diagram examines the response of a person who begins and ends up in the EITC phase-in range. The results would be different for a person who begins in the EITC flat or phase-down range. # THE NIT (OR WELFARE) AND LABOR SUPPLY Suppose the same person is faced with a negative income tax (or a welfare program) instead of the EITC. This is shown in Figure 12A.2. With the NIT (or welfare), the person gets a maximum amount if her earnings are zero (e.g., $5,000, as shown in Figure 12A.2). # FIGURE 12A.2 Welfare and Work

| Welfare (or the NIT) induces a person to work less. |                           |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| N •                                                 | Income                    |
| D •                                                 | $ 5,000                   |
| O •                                                 | • F                       |
| 8,260                                               | 500 • M                   |
| NIT                                                 | (Welfare)                 |
| 8,760                                               | Hours of leisure per year |
