\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment A tax per unit of electricity (the polluting good). Why? Because the producers of electricity—electric utilities—can vary the quantity of sulfur dioxide that is emitted per unit of electricity produced. The utilities can use low-sulfur coal instead of high-sulfur coal, or they can install a scrubber, as we discussed earlier. They can switch to another fuel that contains no sulfur. It is important to give electric utilities an incentive to make choices that reduce the quantity of sulfur dioxide emitted into the air per unit of electricity produced. A tax per unit of electricity won’t provide such an incentive, but a tax per unit of sulfur dioxide emitted will. Thus, the government should levy a tax per unit of sulfur dioxide emitted into the air, not a tax per unit of electricity produced, just as it should vary the gasoline tax according to the pollution from that particular kind of gasoline. We can state our general conclusion: Whenever feasible, levy the tax per unit of pollution—per emission—not per unit of polluting good. In the remainder of this chapter, we will assume that the tax is per unit of pollution, not per unit of good. # To Minimize Cost, Levy the Same Tax on All Firms Emitting Pollutant X This section demonstrates a point that is of the utmost importance for public policy:

* To minimize the cost of achieving a given reduction in pollutant X, the same tax per emission should be levied on all firms emitting pollutant X.

To show this important point, we work with a diagram, Figure 2.5, that has emissions (pollution), instead of the quantity of the polluting good (such as gasoline), on the horizontal axis. In this diagram, the marginal damage (MD) is the amount of damage per emission (per unit of pollution). We simplify our example and diagram by assuming that the marginal damage stays constant as the quantity of emissions increases so that the MD curve is a horizontal line; the marginal damage is $40 per unit of pollutant X at all levels of emissions. The main conclusions of this section would still remain valid if MD varied with the quantity of pollution. There are two firms emitting this pollutant. Suppose in the absence of any government policy that each firm, coincidentally, emits 50 units. Although the two firms emit the same chemical pollutant, assume that the two firms produce different goods and therefore would incur different costs for abating pollution. Each firm can abate pollution—reduce its emissions starting from 50 units by moving leftward—but at a cost. For example, emissions can be reduced by installing equipment that reduces the pollution that accompanies a given quantity of its output or by switching to a more costly but less polluting production process. For each firm, starting from an emissions level of 50, each unit abated entails a higher marginal abatement cost (MAC). For example, as shown in Figure 2.5, as firm H (the high abatement cost firm) moves left from 50 emissions, its MACH rises sharply; and as firm L (the low abatement cost firm) moves left from 50 emissions, its MACL rises slowly. It is socially optimal for each firm to abate another unit of pollution as long as its MAC is less than the MD ($40). Thus, starting from 50 emissions, firm H should abate 10 and continue to emit 40, while firm L should abate 40 and continue to emit 10. A tax T of $40 per emission—a tax T equal to the marginal damage (MD) per emission—would induce each firm to abate the socially optimal quantity. The manager of each firm would recognize that it is profitable to abate a unit as long as its MAC is less than the tax it would otherwise have to pay to emit the unit. So starting at 50 emissions, each firm would find it profitable to reduce emissions as long as its MAC is less than the tax of $40. Thus, firm H would keep abating pollution until its emissions have...