\# 36 Public Finance resources. Producers and consumers are induced to produce and consume more than they would if they recognized that the real cost is higher. The price system is an information system—each price is supposed to signal the marginal social cost of the product so that producers and consumers can make decisions based on accurate information. A polluting good is underpriced unless the government charges polluters a price equal to the environmental cost. If clean alternatives to the polluting good are subsidized, the clean alternatives will also be underpriced. The economically correct solution is accurate pricing for both the polluting good and its clean alternatives: Producers of the polluting good should be charged a price equal to the environmental cost, and clean alternatives should not be given a subsidy. Sixth, subsidies require raising taxes, cutting other government programs, or borrowing to pay for them. Whoever pays the taxes that are raised, or benefits from the programs that are cut, or pays the interest in the future on the new borrowing, will bear the burden of the subsidies. Moreover, as we will see in Chapter 7, most taxes impose some inefficiency on the economy. The burden due to subsidies is the same whether the subsidies are delivered by explicit direct payments to firms or consumers by the government, or by tax breaks to producers or consumers. The tax breaks mean that the producers or consumers are allowed to pay less tax if they produce or consume the subsidized alternative. However, the government collects less tax revenue from them. To make up for this cut in revenue, the government must raise other taxes or cut programs or borrow. Thus, virtually all economists recommend resisting the temptation to impose mandates or give subsidies to producers and consumers of alternative clean products. The economically best solution is to charge the polluters a price equal to the environmental cost and avoid either mandates or subsidies to producers or consumers. # ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF A POLLUTION TAX AND TRADABLE PERMITS # A Pollution Tax We will now show, using a supply and demand diagram, that a competitive market generates too much of a polluting good—a good whose production or use generates pollution—however, if a tax is imposed, the competitive market will produce less of the good, and if just the right tax is imposed, the competitive market will produce just the right quantity of the polluting good. # The Right Tax Generates the Right Quantity of a Polluting Good A competitive market is governed by demand and supply, as shown for gasoline in Figure 2.2. The lower the price, the greater the quantity demanded by the buyers of gasoline. The higher the price, the greater the quantity supplied by the sellers of gasoline. The market will go to the intersection point: The price of gasoline will turn out to be $3.50, and the quantity actually bought and sold will be 100. The height of the supply curve equals the marginal private cost (MPC). Sellers compare the cost they will actually have to pay to produce another gallon—their marginal private cost—to the price they will get for it. As long as their MPC is less than the price, they make more profit by producing another gallon. For example, when the price is $3.50, sellers keep producing as long as the MPC is less than $3.50—according to the diagram, 100 gallons. So the cost of producing the 100th gallon must be just under $3.50 because it would be produced if the price were $3.50. The cost of producing the 101st gallon must be just above $3.50 because it would not be produced if the price were $3.50.