\# 30 Public Finance that enables her to obtain full compensation under the law from the rancher for damages to the crop—by bringing the case to court if necessary. If the cost in legal fees and time spent going to court is small relative to the crop damage, the farmer will sue. Knowing this, the rancher would have an incentive to avoid damaging the farmer’s crop. Coase also noted that if, instead, the rancher were given a property right permitting her cattle to eat the farmer’s grass, the farmer would offer to pay the rancher to restrain her cattle; so once again, the rancher would have an incentive to restrain her cattle. Thus, whether the property right is assigned to the farmer or the rancher, the rancher would have an incentive to restrain her cattle. Thus, the government need not impose a price; assigning a property right would generate the proper financial incentive to restrain the cattle. Suppose the rancher were surrounded by numerous independent farmers and her cattle ate a small quantity of each farmer’s crop. Even if each farmer were given a property right, the damage to each farmer might be less than the cost in legal fees and time spent going to court to sue for damages. If so, each farmer would not sue. Knowing this, the rancher would have no incentive to restrain her cattle. It might be possible for a law firm to try to organize a class action suit of all damaged farmers, but financing such a suit—the transactions costs, or the costs involved in organizing the suit and contacting the numerous parties to the suit—may be prohibitive for achieving voluntary collective action. Thus, if many farmers were each harmed a small amount by a particular rancher, it would be more practical for the government to charge the rancher a price per unit of crop damaged. Usually only a few farmers are damaged by a particular rancher, so establishing a property right is all that is needed to solve that problem. However, in the case of major environmental pollutants, many citizens are harmed. Most economists agree that for these pollutants, the best practical solution is to have the government charge polluters a price per emission. # The Trade-Off between Environmental Quality and Output Consider a highly lethal pollutant: The slightest emission would cause enormous damage. What do economists recommend? The same thing as any other sensible citizen: Ban it. But economists view a ban as an extreme case of our two pricing methods. Under the tax method, the more harmful the pollutant, the higher should be the tax per unit of pollutant; in the extreme, the tax should be so high that no polluter could afford to emit even a single unit. Under the permit method, the more harmful the pollutant, the smaller should be the aggregate number of permits that the government sells; in the extreme, the number sold should be zero. Economists contend that citizens should recognize the basic trade-off shown in Figure 2.1. Getting more environmental quality involves giving up some output. For example, suppose that under a free market with no governmental environmental policy, a low environmental quality would result (level F). How can environmental quality be raised? One way is for firms to switch to cleaner but more costly production techniques. Another way is for firms to cut back on output involving pollution. Still another is for firms to produce and pollute exactly as before, but for the government to use up resources to treat the pollution. Whichever method is used to improve environmental quality, there will be less output for consumers to enjoy. To raise environmental quality (from level F toward level A), the economy must move along the trade-off curve and accept less output. What point on the trade-off curve is best for people’s welfare? Imagine that the economy is initially at point F. Then imagine reducing output just enough to raise