\# 14 Public Finance effort; many individuals may be unable to become a surgeon, corporate lawyer, investment banker, CEO of a large firm, or star athlete or entertainer, no matter how hard they try to acquire education and training. Some people may exert extraordinary effort but still generate low productivity. Moreover, income received in a free market may reflect good or bad luck rather than simply high or low productivity. One person buys corporate stocks and the timing turns out to be right—just after the purchase the stock market rises sharply and the person sells the stocks making a huge capital gain. A year later another person buys stocks and the timing turns out to be wrong—the market plunges and stays down for several years; needing cash, that individual is forced to sell at a huge capital loss. Two small oil and gas companies face the same probability of striking oil: One strikes oil, makes a big profit, and pays its managers big bonuses; the other strikes nothing, makes a big loss, and cuts the pay of its managers. One aspiring actor has a connection that gets him a part in a movie that turns out to be huge success, and soon after he is offered huge compensation for his next movie; another equally talented aspiring actor lacks the connection, fails to get a breakthrough part, and ends up leaving acting for an ordinary job with ordinary pay. # Taxation A progressive income tax can be used to make the distribution of after-tax income less unequal than the market distribution of before-tax income. A progressive tax applies a higher tax rate to high-income households, a proportional tax applies the same tax rate to all households, and a regressive tax applies a higher tax rate to low-income households. Consider an example of a progressive tax. Suppose high-income person H has $100,000 of income, and low-income person L, $10,000, so H has 10 times the income of L. If both face the same 20% tax rate, H’s after-tax income would be $80,000 and L’s, $8,000, so H would have 10 times the after-tax income as L ($80,000 ÷ $8,000 = 10); with a proportional tax, the after-tax income ratio is the same as the before-tax income ratio. However, suppose H is taxed 20.8% and L, 12%, so that H pays $20,800 in tax and L pays $1,200. Then H would have 9 times the after-tax income of L ($79,200 ÷ $8,800 = 9). Hence, a progressive tax makes the ratio of after-tax incomes less than the ratio of before-tax incomes. Is a progressive tax fairer than a proportional tax? If H and L have the same economic aptitude but H works hard and L is lazy, then many citizens would object to trying to narrow their inequality with a progressive tax. But if L works just as hard as H but has much lower economic aptitude, many would conclude that some narrowing of inequality through a progressive tax might be fair. If the main reason that high-income people earn more than low-income people is that they try harder, then a progressive tax might seem unfair, but if the main reason is economic aptitude or luck, then a progressive tax might seem fair. # Efficiency It should be recognized that there is an efficiency loss to the economy from a progressive tax because it discourages efforts to earn more, and the greater the progressivity, the greater the efficiency loss. In the above example where H is taxed 20.8% and L 12%, H has 9 times as much after-tax income as L; the reduction from 10 to 9 would still leave most individuals with plenty of incentive to try to get the education and training needed to have H’s rather than L’s skill. The higher the tax rate set on H and the lower the tax rate on L, the less would be the incentive. In the extreme, suppose H were taxed 100% of any income above $10,000. Then it wouldn’t pay for a person to