\# Chapter 4 Cost-Benefit Analysis essentially the same problem: measuring costs, measuring benefits, and recognizing the role of the interest rate in converting a future value to a “present value.” When government uses cost-benefit analysis, measuring benefits is often difficult because the analyst must rely on imperfect methods, such as revealed preference and contingent valuation. We begin with an example in which a private firm weighs cost against benefit. We then consider several examples in which the government weighs cost against benefit. # A PRIVATE FIRM # Building a Factory Consider a firm with expanding demand for its product. With its current factory the firm is already producing at capacity, so to take advantage of the expanding demand, the firm would have to build another factory. To decide whether it is worth building another factory, the firm must compare the cost of building the factory with the benefit—the additional profit that can be made by producing and selling more. In order to keep things as simple as possible, we assume there is no taxation. Suppose that the factory would be built in one year (year 0) and that it will last only one year (year 1) before wearing out. The construction cost in year 0 would be $100,000, and the profit (excluding any interest cost due to borrowing) in year 1 would be $110,000. Should the firm build it? The answer depends on whether the interest rate at that time is greater or less than 10%. # Building with Borrowing Suppose the firm must borrow $100,000 in year 0 to pay for the construction cost, and will repay the loan in year 1. If the interest rate is 5%, the firm must repay $105,000; the profit of $110,000 would more than cover the loan repayment, and the correct decision is to build. However, if the interest rate is 15%, the firm must repay $115,000; the profit of $110,000 would not cover the loan repayment, and the correct decision is not to build. # Present Value It is useful to consider an equivalent way of arriving at the decision. The $100,000 cost occurs this year—in the present—but the $110,000 profit occurs next year—in the future. Is the $110,000 next year enough? We take the present value (PV) of the $110,000 which equals $110,000/(1 + r) where r is the interest rate: PV of $110,000 in year 1 = $110,000 / (1 + r) If r = 10%, the PV of $110,000 in year 1 equals $100,000 today in year 0. The present value (PV) of a future amount at a future date is the amount you would need to put in the bank today to have that future amount by that future date. In this example, you would have to put $100,000 in the bank today (year 0) to have $110,000 by next year (year 1). Clearly, present value depends on the interest rate. Present value is sometimes called the present discounted value to emphasize the fact that it is obtained by dividing the future value by a number greater than 1—that is, discounting the future value. In particular, the future value is divided by (1 + the discount rate); in our example, the discount rate is the interest rate. We omit the word discounted and use the term present value and the abbreviation PV.