\# Public Finance interest every year than it has paid in benefits; its surplus has been invested in nonmarketable Treasury securities that pay interest and are now worth over $2 trillion. When the Treasury issues debt to Social Security in exchange for Social Security’s cash surplus, the Treasury uses the cash for other government spending. This does not mean the Treasury has “raided” the Social Security Trust Fund, but only that it has borrowed from the Trust Fund (borrowers always take cash and spend it while promising to repay the debt in the future). Once demographics cause Social Security’s scheduled benefits to exceed its revenues, Social Security will ask the Treasury to redeem its securities for cash to pay scheduled benefits. The Treasury is obligated to provide this cash to Social Security in the same way it is obligated to provide cash to public bondholders when its bonds mature. Thus, in the future, Congress and the president must make sure that the Treasury is able to raise the cash to pay debt held by government agencies like Social Security as well as debt held by the public. It is therefore important to keep track of the government’s gross debt ($9 trillion) as well as its net debt to the public ($5 trillion). The Treasury’s authority to issue gross debt to the public and government agencies is subject to a statutory limit, but whenever the gross debt approaches the limit, Congress votes to raise the limit (after representatives and senators have made speeches vowing to avoid more borrowing in the future). # The Interest Burden of the U.S. Treasury Large deficits and borrowing during World War II in the first half of the 1940s raised U.S. Treasury debt held by the public (i.e., net debt) to over 100% of GDP by the war’s end in 1945. In the next three decades, GDP grew a lot and government debt only a little (the budget oscillated between small surpluses and small deficits that were generally less than 1% of GDP), so net debt as a percentage of GDP declined to 26% in 1980. Over the next two decades a dramatic fiscal story unfolded: The rise and fall of U.S. Treasury debt as a percentage of GDP. To follow the story, look back at Figures 1.11 and 1.12 in Chapter 1 and also look at the top row of Table 13.2. From 1981 to 1992, the federal deficit (the excess of federal spending over federal tax revenue) ranged from 2% to 6% of GDP, averaging roughly 4% of GDP. With federal spending roughly 20% of GDP and federal borrowing 4% of GDP, between 1981 and 1992 for every $100 the federal government spent, $20 were borrowed and only $80 came from tax revenue. Net debt as a percentage of GDP rose from 26% in 1980 to 49% in 1993. In the rest of the 1990s, rapid GDP growth and the transformation of budget deficits to surpluses of 1% of GDP reduced debt as a percentage of GDP to 33%. Since then, deficits returned and raised debt as a percentage of GDP to 37% in 2007. # Table 13.2

| Interest Burden of the U.S. Treasury and U.S. Taxpayers | U.S. net debt as a percent of GDP                |      |      |      |      |
| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 1980                                                    | 1993                                             | 2001 | 2007 |      |      |
|                                                         | Interest rate on U.S. Treasury bonds             | 7.3  | 6.1  | 6.0  | 4.6  |
|                                                         | Net interest as a percent of GDP                 | 1.9  | 3.0  | 2.0  | 1.7  |
|                                                         | Revenue as a percent of GDP                      | 19.0 | 17.5 | 19.8 | 18.8 |
|                                                         | Net interest as a percent of revenue             | 10.0 | 17.0 | 10.0 | 9.0  |
|                                                         | Percent of revenue available to finance programs | 90.0 | 83.0 | 90.0 | 91.0 |
