\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment alternatives. There is no favoring of one clean process or product over another by the government. The market is left to develop the alternatives and present them to potential consumers. Second, any list of mandates for particular clean technologies and products is likely to reduce pollution at an unnecessarily high cost to consumers. Consider two examples: (1) requiring electric utilities to use “scrubbers” to remove sulfur dioxide when coal containing sulfur is burned and (2) requiring auto manufacturers to produce cars with a specified gas mileage—corporate average fuel efficiency (CAFE) standards. For some electric utilities, it may be cheaper to switch from high-sulfur coal to low-sulfur coal rather than install scrubbers. Electric utilities, like other firms, pass on costs to consumers through higher prices. By contrast, if electric utilities are charged a price for emitting sulfur dioxide, they will have an incentive to choose the least-cost method of reducing emissions, and this will minimize the price increase to consumers. CAFE standards raise the cost of producing cars, but once cars are purchased, drivers have no incentive to reduce their driving. By contrast, taxing oil or gasoline gives drivers an incentive both to buy cars that get better gas mileage and to drive less; with a tax, each driver would have an incentive to choose the least-cost way of reducing the use of gasoline—either buying a car with better gas mileage, reducing driving, or both. With a tax, if it is not very costly to raise the gas mileage of cars, then most drivers will switch to high-gas-mileage cars; if it is very costly to raise gas mileage, many drivers will stick with low-gas-mileage cars but will strive to reduce their driving. By contrast, if it is very costly to raise gas mileage, a high CAFE standard will impose a very high cost on all car buyers. In 2007, Congress passed and the president signed into law a new energy bill that raised the CAFE standard from 25 miles per gallon (set three decades ago) to 35 miles per gallon by 2020. Congress did not consider the alternative, recommended by many economists, of raising the federal tax on gasoline which is currently 18.4 cents a gallon—much lower than it is in most economically advanced countries. One reason Congress chose CAFE over a gas tax is that the cost to consumers of raising the CAFE standard is hidden, while the cost of raising the tax on gasoline would be very visible. Third, any list of subsidies for particular clean technologies and products must inevitably result in a distorted playing field among potential alternatives. Any process or subsidy that is included in the list will have an improper advantage over any that is omitted. Technologies or products that are yet to be invented would initially have to be omitted; potential inventors would have no guarantee that embarking on a costly effort would ultimately result in an adequate subsidy. Even if a well-intentioned board of technicians tried to be neutral among products included in the list, it would be extremely difficult for the technicians to figure out how to subsidize all products on the list equally. Fourth, political lobbying for subsidies would distort the playing field among potential alternatives. The list and magnitude of subsidies in practice would not be determined by a board of technicians. It would be determined by politicians who would be subjected to lobbying by producers and consumers seeking subsidies for their particular alternative. Producers differ in lobbying strength, and lobbying strength would shape the magnitude of the subsidies that result from the political process. Fifth, switching to clean alternatives is not always the socially optimal response. Suppose all the clean alternatives are very costly—they use up a lot of resources. Then it might be socially optimal for consumers to drive less or wear sweaters indoors rather than switch to costly high-gas-mileage cars or clean driving fuels or clean heating technologies. A subsidy makes a clean alternative appear cheaper than its real use of