\# Public Finance # Case Study: Should Suburbs Help Their Central City? In 2003, University of Pennsylvania economics professor Robert Inman provided an analysis and case study of whether Philadelphia’s suburbs should help their central city, and if so, how. His study is relevant to the suburbs of most other cities as well. In the Philadelphia metropolitan region, locally raised revenue pays for about three-fourths of local government spending, while grants from Pennsylvania pay for about one-fourth. Property taxes on residents and business firms account for more than half of local tax revenue, while income taxes account for more than a quarter. The central city of the region, Philadelphia, is the home of business firms and medical, educational, cultural, and entertainment centers that employ and serve suburbanites as well as city residents. The central city also has a large share of the region’s poor people who cannot pay much in taxes but have the same needs for public services (in fact, a greater need for police protection). Consequently, tax rates must be set higher in Philadelphia than in more affluent suburbs to raise the same revenue. But these higher tax rates tend to drive affluent people and business firms out of the city, exacerbating its fiscal problem. Faced with a large number of poor residents who need public services but can’t pay much in taxes, the city levies a wage tax on the earnings of anyone who works in the city, regardless of where she resides. Some city workers take suburban jobs to escape the city’s wage tax; to try to keep other workers from escaping, city businesses must raise wages; in turn, effect, suburbanites should support a redistribution of funds from the suburbs to the city implemented by the state government. The case study described in the box above suggests that such a strategy can be “win-win,” benefiting most suburbanites and city residents. # THE PROPERTY TAX The most important source of tax revenue for local governments in the United States is the property tax; it accounts for more than half the tax revenue of most local governments. We begin by explaining the mechanics of the property tax and how it distributes the tax burden across residents. Then we examine arguments for and criticisms of the property tax.