\# Public Finance # Current Research # The Debate over the 2006 Stern Review on Global Warming In November 2006, a comprehensive report on global warming was released in Britain with the endorsement of then Prime Minister Tony Blair. The report’s primary author was the economist Nicholas Stern, and the report was called *The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change*. The Stern Review estimated that a failure to sharply and promptly reduce greenhouse gas emissions to a particular target would cause damage equal to 5% of GDP per year. Hence, the benefit of reducing emissions from the projected level under business as usual to the Stern target would be 5% of global GDP per year. The Stern Review estimated that the cost of this sharp and prompt emissions reduction would be only 1% of global GDP per year. In his 2007 review of the Stern Review, economist William Nordhaus of Yale University,\* who has constructed empirical economic models of global warming, reports that his most recent model, also based on cost-benefit analysis, prescribes a much more moderate gradual “ramping up” of emissions reduction than the Stern Review. Nordhaus’s model prescribes a carbon tax today of $17 per ton, while the Stern Review prescribes a carbon tax today of $311 per ton. According to Nordhaus, the main reason for the huge difference in their policy recommendations is the choice of the value for the social discount rate. In his review, Nordhaus says that the Stern Review uses a near-zero social discount rate, so that benefits that occur in the far future from reducing global warming are given the same weight as costs that occur in the present. Nordhaus says that if the Stern Review had used the standard positive social discount rate used in most cost-benefit studies (roughly 3%), which gives much less weight to benefits in the far future than costs in the present, its prescription would have been similar to his model’s prescription. Nordhaus runs his economic model first with his standard social discount rate of 3% and then with the Stern Review’s 0.1% discount rate. He finds that with his discount rate a carbon tax of $17 per ton should be imposed today rising gradually to $84 in 2050 and $270 in 2100, so that the optimal rate of emissions reduction is 6% today, 14% in 2050, and 25% in 2100. But when he runs his model with the Stern Review’s near-zero discount rate (0.1%), he finds that his model would then prescribe the optimal carbon tax today to be $159 (instead of $17), and optimal emissions reduction in 2015 would be 50%. The Stern Review itself prescribes a carbon tax today of $311, so the discount rate is not the sole reason for the huge difference, but it is clearly a key reason for the difference. Another reason for the difference is the way the two models compare persons with different levels of consumption. If productivity continues to advance with technological progress, then people in the future will enjoy much higher per capita consumption than people today. Emissions reduction today to reduce global warming tomorrow means sacrificing consumption by people today in order to prevent a sacrifice in consumption by people in the future. However, people in the future will be able to “afford” a sacrifice in consumption more than people today, because they will be starting from a much higher level of consumption due to technological progress. Nordhaus says that the Stern Review does not sufficiently recognize this difference. How can we decide which social discount rate and which comparison of persons with different levels of consumption are the proper ones to use in a cost-benefit analysis of global warming? Nordhaus offers one way. He says to look at the actual saving rate of most economies. Saving is the main way that people sacrifice today in order to benefit in the future. Nordhaus argues that the actual saving rate reveals how much people value future consumption relative to present consumption and how they compare a sacrifice starting from different levels of consumption. He says that the values he uses in his model generate a saving rate for the economy that corresponds to the actual saving rate observed, while the Stern Review’s values imply a saving rate much higher than we observe. \* William D. Nordhaus, “A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change,” *Journal of Economic Literature* 45, no. 3 (September 2007), pp. 686–702.