\# 136 Public Finance # Moral Hazard and Price Responsiveness There’s another problem to watch out for when you’re deciding which premium to charge called moral hazard: the use of more medical care by insured people because they know that their insurer will pay part or all of their bill. They may order more medical care when they are sick. They may even take less care to stay healthy (through diet and exercise) if they know that insurance will cover their medical care. Suppose insurance causes every enrollee to use 20% more medical care. For every 100 enrollees, 5 will use $73,200, not $61,000, and 95 will use $1,200, not $1,000. For every 100 enrollees, your total medical bill will be 20% greater—instead of $400,000, it will be $480,000:

| 5($61,000) | 95($1,000) | $305,000 | $95,000  | $400,000 |
| ---------- | ---------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 5($73,200) | 95($1,200) | $366,000 | $114,000 | $480,000 |

The expected value of the medical bill of an enrollee will be 20% greater—instead of $4,000, it will be $4,800.

| .05($61,000) | .95($1,000) | $3,050 | $950   | $4,000 |
| ------------ | ----------- | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| .05($73,200) | .95($1,200) | $3,660 | $1,440 | $4,800 |

Why is this expansion in use called moral hazard? One possible reason is that it may strike some people as immoral for a person to use more medical care just because insurance will cover it. But this behavior is familiar to economists. Whenever the price of something is cut, people naturally demand more of it. Economists usually don’t call their behavior immoral, but they simply note that demand has some price responsiveness—people respond to a cut in price by demanding more. For each person, the effective price of using additional medical care has been cut to zero when the insurance company pays the entire bill; not surprisingly, the typical person will expand use in response to this cut in the price. To economists, moral hazard is simply price responsiveness. Economists have used various techniques to try to estimate the magnitude of price responsiveness—specifically, the price elasticity for different kinds of medical care. The price elasticity is defined as the ratio of the percentage increase in the quantity demanded to the percentage reduction in the price. To estimate actual price elasticity, economists use econometric analysis—statistical analysis of data generated by actual behavior in society. The researcher observes changes in price, either over time or across individuals at a point in time, and tries to measure how much quantity changed. Of course, things other than price might have caused quantity to change, so the researcher must try to control for changes in other relevant variables, such as income or medical condition. These studies have found differing estimates, but the studies suggest that the price elasticity for most medical care is not zero—the price patients must pay often has some effect on how much they use. A different source of evidence on price elasticity was provided by an ambitious study conducted in the 1970s called the RAND Health Insurance Experiment.1 Individuals were randomly assigned different prices for medical care—the administrators of the experiment would reimburse some individuals a high percentage and 1 A comprehensive account and analysis of this experiment is given in Joseph Newhouse, *Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment* (Harvard University Press, 1993).