\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance # Appendix # The Indifference-Curve/Budget-Line Diagram In this appendix we introduce the indifference-curve/budget-line diagram. This diagram will be used in the appendices of Chapters 6, 7, 10, 11, and 12. Read this appendix before reading the appendix to any of those chapters. Figure 1A.1 is an indifference-curve/budget-line diagram. Each point indicates a particular quantity of good X, and a particular expenditure Y on other goods. We explain the individual’s budget line, then the individual’s indifference curves, and finally why the individual chooses the point on the budget line that is on a higher indifference curve than any other point on the budget line. If the individual spent no income on good X, point A would be chosen. If the individual spent all income on good X, point B would be chosen. In Figure 1A.1 income is $100, and the price P of good X is $5; then at point A, Y = $100, and at point B, X = 20 units. The individual’s budget line is the line AB. Given the income, the individual can afford any point on the budget line—any combination (X, Y) on the line AB. Consider point J which is on the individual’s budget line when P = $5; at point J, X = 10 and Y = $50, so J is (10, $50). The person can afford to buy 10 units of X, thereby spending $50 on X, and would have $50 left over to spend on other goods. If P were higher, then the budget line would be AC, which is steeper than AB. In Figure 1A.1 if P were $10, then at point C, X would be 10. If the price is $5, then the slope of the budget line is -$5, because the individual must spend $5 less on other goods to get one more unit of X. More generally, the slope of the budget line equals -P. Suppose the individual’s income increases above $100 (not shown); then the vertical axis intercept would shift up above A. Since the price is still P = $5, the slope of the budget line would remain the same; hence, the increase in income would shift the budget line out parallel to AB. Which of the points on the budget line AB should the individual choose? The answer is the point that gives the individual a higher utility (subjective satisfaction). # FIGURE 1A.1

| The Indifference Curve Diagram |    |
| ------------------------------ | -- |
| $100                           | A  |
| $50                            | J  |
| C                              | B  |
| 5                              | 10 |
| 20                             |    |
