\# Chapter 10 State and Local Public Finance Taxes should be assigned to which levels. The perspectives of both political scientists and economists should be considered in deciding what constitutes optimal federalism. Our strategy for analyzing state and local public finance is as follows. In the first section of this chapter, we examine optimal federalism in a hypothetical society where all households have similar incomes. In order to decide which level of government should be assigned which tasks in such a society, we must understand the Tiebout process, local externalities, and scale economies. In the second section we examine optimal federalism in a more realistic society where households differ in income. It must be emphasized that in such a society the Tiebout process, local externalities, and scale economies continue to be important; but in addition, there is also a separation process that plays an important role in deciding which level of government should be assigned which programs and taxes. # OPTIMAL FEDERALISM WHEN HOUSEHOLD INCOMES ARE SIMILAR In this section we assume unrealistically that all households throughout society have similar incomes, so that no one chooses to reside in one locality over another because of the income of its residents. # The Tiebout Process Just as individuals differ about the mix of private goods that they prefer to consume, so they also differ about the mix of public goods. We know that one size doesn’t fit all for private goods. The same is true with public goods. Even if people had the same income, some would prefer to spend more money to get a higher quality of public schools but not public parks, while other individuals would prefer the reverse. Because individuals with the same income differ in their preferences, it is better to offer them a variety of packages of public goods and taxes, rather than a uniform one size fits all. A half-century ago, economist Charles Tiebout (pronounced tee boo) contended that just as firms compete to attract and retain consumers, local governments compete to attract and retain residents; this process—known as the Tiebout process—benefits individuals with varying preferences by offering them varying packages of public goods. Firms try to offer consumers an attractive package of quality and price. Similarly, local governments try to offer potential residents an attractive package of quality and taxes. Just as some firms try to attract consumers with particular preferences, some local governments try to attract potential residents with particular preferences. Just as some firms offer a high-quality, high-price product while others offer a low-price, low-quality product, some local governments offer a high-quality, high-tax package while others offer a low-tax, low-quality package. Tiebout contended that competition among local governments tends to satisfy the preferences of residents just as competition among firms satisfies the preferences of consumers. This competitive process also promotes the efficient (least-cost) provision of public services of a given quality by local governments just as it does by private firms. If one local government produced a given quality of public education with unnecessarily high cost and hence high taxes, potential residents who prefer that quality would choose to live in another locality with the same school quality but lower cost and hence lower taxes. Hence, efficient localities would attract residents away from inefficient ones just as efficient firms attract consumers away from inefficient competitors. Finally, the competitive process promotes innovation and experimentation by local governments, just as it does for private firms. Different local governments would try