\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency Increase labor) when the after-tax wage rises, so the person’s ordinary labor supply curve would have a positive slope (instead of being vertical). Consider another person for whom point B would be northeast (instead of directly north) of point A (the substitution effect to the left would be smaller than the income effect to the right). That person would increase leisure (hence, decrease labor) when the after-tax wage rises, so the person’s ordinary labor supply curve would have a negative slope (instead of being vertical). # A TAX ON CAPITAL INCOME USING AN INDIFFERENCE-CURVE/BUDGET-LINE DIAGRAM We now use an indifference-curve/budget-line diagram to analyze the effect of removing an interest income tax on saving. Suppose there is a 40% tax on interest income, the before-tax interest rate is 10%, and the after-tax interest rate is 6%. We assume that a person gets “utility” (subjective well-being) from two “goods”: present consumption (C₀) and future consumption (C₁). Figure 7A.2(a) shows the indifference-curve/budget-line diagram. Present consumption (C₀) is plotted horizontally, and future consumption (C₁) is plotted vertically. Suppose at the beginning of period 0, the person earns $1,000 of after-tax wage income. One extreme option for the person would be to consume $1,000 in period 0 and $0 in period 1. Starting at this extreme option, for each $100 of C₀ he forgoes by saving, he can consume $106 of C₁ because the after-tax interest rate is 6%, so the slope of the budget line is –1.06. The person chooses the point on his budget line that maximizes utility—that reaches the highest indifference curve. In this example, the person chooses C₀ $500, S₀ $500, and C₁ $530 (because interest is $50, tax is $20, so $530 can be spent in period 1). Now suppose the tax is removed for all savers and the after-tax interest rate rises above 6%. The removal of the tax may reduce the market interest rate—assume it reduces it from 10% to 9%. Then the after-tax interest rate rises from 6% to 9%, and in the Figure 7A.2(a) the person’s budget line becomes steeper (because the slope changes from –1.06 to –1.09) and he moves from point A to point B, which is the point on the steeper budget line that reaches the highest indifference curve. As drawn, point B is directly above (north of) point A, but this need not be so; point B might be either northeast or northwest of point A rather than directly north. As drawn, the removal of the tax and the rise in the after-tax interest rate from 6% to 9% do not cause the person to change his saving in period 0 (S₀)—his saving remains $500 and his consumption (C₀) remains $500. But with the after-tax interest rate 9% instead of 6%, his interest is $45, so his future consumption (C₁) is $545 at point B (instead of $530 at point A). When the person moves from point A to point B, his utility increases because he reaches a higher indifference curve. Figure 7A.2(b) shows what happens to this person’s saving when the tax is removed and the after-tax interest rate increases from 6% to 9%. In Figure 7A.2(b) \[in contrast to Figure 7A.2(a)], saving (not present consumption) is plotted horizontally, and the after-tax interest rate (not future consumption) is plotted vertically. This person’s saving remains $500. Thus, this person’s ordinary saving supply curve (Sord) is vertical (completely inelastic): When the after-tax interest rate rises, there is no change in the person’s saving. It is useful to divide the move from A to B in Figure 7A.2(a) into two parts: a move from A to s, and a move from s to B. The move from A to s is called the substitution effect, and the move from s to B is called the income effect. Let’s explain each effect in turn.