\# In The News # The Bush Administration’s Social Security Proposal In 2005 President George W. Bush proposed permitting each worker to decide whether to stay with the current Social Security program or divert 4 percentage points out of the 6.2%—hence, about two-thirds—of his payroll tax to his own newly established individual investment account and, in return, receive a lower regular Social Security benefit upon retirement. Under the proposal, the government would borrow to replace the diverted revenue in order to maintain benefits for current retirees, so in the future, additional taxes would be needed to finance the interest payments the government would owe on its borrowing. The majority of Republicans in Congress supported the president’s proposal, while most Democrats (and a few Republicans) opposed establishing individual investment accounts as part of Social Security and borrowing to maintain the benefits of current retirees. President Bush was unable to secure passage by Congress of his proposal. Pure approaches. For example, Congress might decide to enact several of the measures discussed in the section “Treating the 2040 Problem,” such as raising the retirement age; taking a step toward collective self-sufficiency by increasing the buildup of the Social Security Trust Fund enough to prevent the complete drawing down of bonds in the Trust Fund; and establishing individual investment accounts using a small percentage of payroll tax and some borrowing. Thus, if no pure solution can command a majority in Congress (as well as obtain a signature from the president), the challenge will be to find some combination and compromise that can be enacted into law and make a significant improvement in the prospects of Social Security. # Summary There are four ways to prepare for retirement: workers can support retirees individually or collectively or each generation can be self-sufficient individually or collectively. When workers support retirees collectively, the workers’ rate of return approximately equals the sum of the growth rate of the labor force and the growth rate of wages. When workers are self-sufficient, the rate of return equals the marginal product of capital. It is likely that the rate of return will be several points higher when workers are self-sufficient than when workers support retirees. Also, the capital stock of the economy will be higher when workers are self-sufficient than when workers support retirees. However, once a system of workers-support-retirees is in place, breaking out is hard to do, because during the transition it requires double saving: Workers must save to support retirees while also saving to provide for their own retirement. Under the U.S. Social Security program, workers support retirees collectively: Payroll taxes from workers are sent to retirees as benefits. Each worker’s benefit upon retirement depends on the worker’s wage history. The benefit formula enacted by Congress gives a higher replacement rate to low-income workers than to high-income workers; the replacement rate for the average worker is roughly 40%. Each retiree receives a benefit that is automatically adjusted each year for inflation and continues as long as the person lives. Payroll taxes have caused little reduction in the work of heads of households, but payroll taxes together with the 50% spousal benefit may have reduced the market work effort of spouses who would have been second earners. Evidence from several countries, including the United States, suggests that many workers choose to retire at whatever age the Social Security program designates as the youngest age at which benefits are available; thus Social Security influences retirement. It seems likely that Social Security reduces private saving, because workers expecting Social Security benefits at retirement recognize.