\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance # Cost-Benefit Analysis: Chapter 4 Consider these decisions facing the government: Should it build a new highway? How much should it spend to improve the safety of a highway? How much of a reduction in carbon emissions should it try to get the private sector to achieve? Should it pay for new costly medical treatment X? Should it intervene militarily? Each of these decisions involves weighing cost against benefit. Chapter 4 explains how cost-benefit analysis should be done in these examples and more generally in order to guide government decisions. It also explains mistakes to be avoided when doing cost-benefit analysis. # Which Level of Government? Chapter 10 When the free market works poorly and government intervention seems warranted, a question arises: Which level of government—federal, state, or local—should intervene? Chapter 10 examines the roles of local government and state government. The strategy of Chapter 10 is to first consider a society in which all households have similar incomes and then to turn more realistically to a society in which households differ significantly in income. If all households in society had similar incomes, local government would often (though not always) be preferable to a higher level of government (state or federal). The reason is that numerous local governments would compete to attract households by offering an attractive mix of public services and taxes. Local governments would compete for residents the way firms compete for consumers, and this competition would be beneficial, just as it is for other goods and services. Of course, even in a society with similar incomes, state or federal government should build highways and the federal government should provide national defense. But when incomes differ significantly among households, the presumption in favor of local government may need partial reconsideration. Why? Local governments often prefer to attract high-income households that are more able to finance local schools and other public services and less likely to inject street crime. As a consequence, a separation process develops whereby high-income people locate in high-income communities and use zoning to exclude middle- and low-income households. In turn, middle-income households locate in middle-income communities and use zoning to exclude low-income households. With communities differing significantly by income, local financing of public schools would result in a wide variation of school quality across communities. To reduce this inequality, at least some of the financing must come from a higher level of government—state or federal—which can collect more tax dollars from high-income than low-income households and then distribute more dollars to low-income than high-income schools. What kind of tax should a local government use? The federal government relies on income tax and payroll tax, state governments rely on sales tax and income tax, but local governments rely on property tax. Chapter 10 discusses why and examines the pros and cons of a property tax. # Borrowing Instead of Taxing: Chapter 13 When should the government borrow instead of tax? Borrowing is tempting for a government just as it is for a household. By borrowing, a household can consume more than it earns. By borrowing, a government can provide more programs that voters want without levying the taxes they don’t want. But a household that borrows must eventually repay the loan plus interest, so a household should generally limit its borrowing to long-term productive investments and emergencies. Is the same true of a government? Chapter 13 explains how the commonsense concern about excessive borrowing applies.