\# Chapter 5 Social Security unemployed. Many, through no fault of their own, faced old age without savings. Couldn’t anything be done to help them? The answer was yes. Instead of sticking to the original plan, Social Security could take the payroll tax revenue coming in and use it to send benefits to these unfortunate retirees. In Table 5.1, the system could be moved from the southeast entry up to the northeast entry: Collectively workers would support retirees. Immediately the question arose: What will become of today’s workers when they retire because there won’t be any buildup of a large fund? And immediately came an answer: When they retire, the payroll taxes of the next generation of workers (and their employers) will be used to pay their benefits. So around 1940 Social Security adopted the new plan and began paying out benefits instead of building up a large fund. The new plan came to be called pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) because when people worried, “How will benefits be paid if no fund builds up,” they were told, “Don’t worry, we’ll pay as we go—we’ll use tomorrow’s payroll taxes to pay tomorrow’s benefits.” PAYGO is another name for the northeast entry in Table 5.1: Collectively workers support retirees. Needless to say, the new plan was a great deal for people retiring in the 1940s. Take Ida Fuller of Vermont. Legend has it that she was about to retire when Social Security was enacted, so prior to retirement she (and her employer) paid only about $20 of payroll tax. But once she retired she had the fortitude to live to a very old age, collecting about $20,000 in Social Security benefits! Before getting too angry at Ida and other retirees of that era, remember that most of them suffered economic hardship through no fault of their own due to the Great Depression. At any rate, there’s no way to get the money back from these retirees—they’ve been dead for half a century. For the next 40 years until 1980, Social Security followed the PAYGO plan. Each year, payroll tax revenue would be sent out to pay benefits. For people retiring in the 1950s, Social Security was not quite as spectacular a deal as it had been for people retiring in the 1940s, but it was still a very good deal: the 1950s retirees had only paid payroll tax during the last decade or two of their work careers, but they were now receiving benefits financed by payroll taxes on the entire workforce. Each decade, Social Security became less of a great deal. By 1980, virtually every retiree had paid payroll taxes over his entire work career, so for each retiree, the taxes he had paid were no longer much less than the benefits he received during retirement. # The Ratio of Workers to Retirees In the early 1980s not only was Social Security no longer a spectacular deal, but a demographic threat loomed on the horizon. It was recognized by experts that in three decades (around 2010) the numerous baby boomers—born in the decade and a half following World War II—would stop being workers who paid payroll taxes and become retirees entitled to Social Security benefits. Also, medical advances would enable many of these boomers to live to a very old age; they would spend many years in retirement receiving benefits. This prediction made by experts in the early 1980s proved accurate. Figure 5.1 shows how the ratio of workers to retirees (the number of workers per retiree) has declined in the United States and the projected path for the future. In 1955, the ratio was over 8 workers per retiree. In 2006 the ratio was 3.3 and is projected to decline to 2.1 by 2032. Thus: Over the next two and half decades, the ratio of workers to retirees in the United States is projected to fall from 3 to 2.