\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes # Encouraging Home Ownership Consider the example of encouraging home ownership. The instrument that Congress has chosen is a tax deduction for mortgage interest payments, which is one of the itemized deductions on the 1040 return. If a household borrows from a bank (i.e., takes out a mortgage) to buy a house, it can deduct its monthly interest payments. Note that a household’s monthly mortgage payment to the bank consists partly of interest and partly of repayment of the principal; only the interest is deductible; and the bank will send a statement at the end of the year noting the total interest. For example, if the household makes a total of $2,000 of home mortgage interest payments in a year, it can take an itemized tax deduction of $2,000 on its tax return. As shown in Table 8.14, this policy instrument gives much larger assistance to high-income households than low-income households. Suppose high-income household H buys a high-priced home, takes out a large loan, and has monthly interest payments that total $20,000. If H is in a 35% tax bracket, its tax is reduced by $7,000. By contrast, suppose low-income household L buys a low-priced home, takes out a smaller loan, and has monthly interest payments that total $4,000. If L is in a 15% tax bracket, its tax is reduced by $600. Another property of this policy instrument is that it favors the household that borrows over the household that saves in advance to buy a home. Consider instead a refundable tax credit for buying a home. Congress could vary the credit with the price of the home or the income of the household—however it desires. Consider a home-buyer refundable tax credit that is $10,000 if the household’s income is below $50,000 and that phases down gradually to $0 as household income rises to $150,000; the home-buyer credit would not depend on the price of the home or how much the household borrowed. What would be the effect of Congress’ replacing the home mortgage interest deduction with this home-buyer refundable tax credit? More low-income households would be eligible for more assistance, so there would probably be an increase in home ownership among low-income households. High-income households would buy less expensive homes and take out smaller mortgages, and some high-income households would choose to be renters rather than homeowners. Note that the phaseout schedule would impose an implicit marginal tax rate on home buyers of 10%, because a household that raises its income from $50,000 to $150,000—by $100,000—would have its credit reduced from $10,000 to $0—by $10,000—so the implicit marginal tax rate due to the phaseout would equal $10,000/$100,000, or 10%. Of course, Congress could instead design the credit so that it gives roughly the same pattern of assistance as the current tax deduction. To do this, Congress would need to explicitly vary the tax credit directly with the price of the home, or the amount borrowed, and directly with household income. Hence, the credit would be larger, the higher the price of the home or the amount borrowed, and the higher the income of the household. With the credit, unlike the current deduction, Congress can vary its assistance however it desires.

| Encouraging Home Ownership | Mortgage Interest Payment | Tax Bracket | Tax Saving |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------- | ----------- | ---------- |
| H                          | $20,000                   | 35%         | $7,000     |
| L                          | $4,000                    | 15%         | $600       |
