\# Public Finance # Case Study: The 2003 U.S. Military Intervention in Iraq (continued) American life lost. At the time of their study, 2,400 U.S. soldiers had died in Iraq, implying a cost of $18 billion. Similarly, based on studies of the cost of injuries of varying severity, they estimated a cost of $23 billion for the 18,000 U.S. soldiers who had been wounded. Because of Iraq’s lower per capita income, they used lower values for each Iraqi dead or wounded, but they still arrive at an Iraqi casualty cost of $150 billion. About 40% of U.S. troops in Iraq were from National Guard and Reserves who left their civilian jobs; they estimated this redeployment reduced U.S. output over the period by about $12 billion. They estimated that the war saved about $100 billion by stopping Saddam Hussein from killing his usual 10,000 Iraqis per year and by making economic sanctions of Iraq unnecessary. Subtracting this $100 billion from the $500 billion yielded a net cost of the war of $400 billion as of mid-2006. Dividing by 300 million yields a cost per person of about $1,300 as of mid-2006. # STIGLITZ AND BILMES Also in 2006, economists Joseph Stiglitz and Linda Bilmes estimated that the full cost of the Iraq War would end up exceeding $2.3 trillion, or roughly $7,500 per person ($2,300 × 10⁹ divided by 300 × 10⁶ equals 7.7 × 10³); note that $7,500 per person is 50 times the Bush administration’s prewar estimate of $150 per person (and 25% higher than Nordhaus’s prewar estimate of $6,000 per person). They too argued that the economic cost of the war is much larger than the federal budgetary cost during the war. They contended that a major component of long-term cost is medical care and disability benefits to veterans. Another cost is replacing the military hardware destroyed in the war. Another is the interest cost due to the financing of the war by borrowing rather than taxes. They use $6.5 million as the value of each life lost and add in an estimated cost of living with serious injuries. They included the lost output to the economy of redeploying civilians to the military. Finally, they estimated that the war raised the world oil price by $10 per barrel, imposing a corresponding cost on oil users. All these analyses focused on the cost, but a cost estimate alone would not have been enough to determine a citizen’s decision. Suppose that in fall 2002 the American public had been given an accurate information about the state of Saddam Hussein’s program to develop weapons of mass destruction and what he planned to do if he succeeded in developing such weapons—for example, move his army into Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to take control of their oil fields, or sell some of his new weapons to Al-Qaeda, or move his army through Jordan into the West Bank to confront the Israeli army. Ideally, each citizen would also have accurate information about what the U.S. government planned to do after the invasion: Would the United States withdraw its military as soon as Saddam Hussein was removed from power and was no longer a threat to do any of the above; or instead would it keep its military in Iraq fighting against insurgents for as long as necessary to bring stability and democracy to the country? The cost of removing Saddam Hussein from power and then leaving would be much less than the cost of removing him and then staying and fighting insurgents for as long as it takes to achieve stability and democracy. In practice, in fall 2002 citizens did not have reliable information about the state of Saddam Hussein’s weapons programs or his military intentions, nor did the U.S. government. Citizens were also uncertain about their own government’s postinvasion plans (perhaps the U.S. government was also uncertain). Thus, a cost estimate alone would not have decided the issue for a citizen. However, an accurate cost estimate would still have been helpful. 1 Quoted in “Bush Economic Aide Says Cost of Iraq War May Top $100 Billion,” The Wall Street Journal, September 16, 2002. 2 William Nordhaus. “The Economic Consequences of a War with Iraq,” chap. 3 in War with Iraq: Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives (American Academy of Arts & Sciences, 2002), pp. 51–85. 3 Scott Wallsten and Katrina Kosec, “The Iraq War: The Economic Costs,” The Milken Institute Review, Third Quarter 2006, pp. 16–23. 4 Joseph Stiglitz and Linda Bilmes, “Encore,” The Milken Institute Review, Fourth Quarter 2006, pp. 76–83.