\# Chapter 5 Social Security fall or the tax rate t must be raised. If the tax rate is kept at 15%, then the replacement rate will fall gradually from 45% to 30% (a 33% decline in the replacement rate):

| B   | (ᴸ)      | \_\_       | t     | \_\_     | W    | R   |
| --- | -------- | ---------- | ----- | -------- | ---- | --- |
| $30 | (³⁰⁰)    | \_\_\_\_\_ | (.15) | \_\_\_\_ | $100 | 150 |
| .30 | (.15)(2) |            |       |          |      |     |

Instead, if the replacement rate is to be kept at 45%, then the tax rate must be gradually raised from 15% to 22.5% (a 50% increase in the tax rate):

| B        | (ᴸ)           | \_\_ | t | \_\_ | W | R |
| -------- | ------------- | ---- | - | ---- | - | - |
| $45/$100 | (.225)300/150 |      |   |      |   |   |
| .45      | (.225)(2)     |      |   |      |   |   |

\# The Buildup of the Trust Fund In the early 1980s, policy makers tried to figure out what could be done in advance to reduce the severity of the coming financial crunch for Social Security due to the projected decline in the ratio of workers to retirees. A bipartisan commission, headed by Alan Greenspan (prior to his becoming Federal Reserve chairman in 1987) recommended raising payroll taxes to build up the Social Security Trust Fund. Payroll taxes are deposited into the Trust Fund, and benefits are paid from the Trust Fund, so each year if taxes collected exceed benefits paid, the Trust Fund will build up. Rather than build up cash, the fund would use the cash to buy safe U.S. Treasury bonds that pay interest, and the interest income would help pay benefits when the baby boomers retired. With bipartisan support—so that neither political party could blame the other—Congress passed the payroll tax increase—and over the next two decades, the fund grew steadily; there is now about $2.3 trillion worth of U.S. Treasury bonds held by the Social Security Trust Fund earning substantial interest income every year. Currently the combined employer plus employee payroll tax rate is 12.4% (much higher than before the 1980s) applied to an employee’s wage income up to an annual ceiling that is much larger than before the 1980s—and this number is automatically raised each year to keep pace with increases in wage income: $97,500 in 2007 and $102,000 in 2008. The current buildup postpones, but is not large enough to eliminate, Social Security’s financial problem. The chief actuary of the Social Security Administration reports that if the current tax and benefit rules are unchanged, then in about two decades the Trust Fund will have to start gradually cashing in its Treasury bonds to get enough cash to pay scheduled benefits—tax revenues and interest won’t be enough to pay scheduled benefits—and by 2040 there will be no bonds left in the Trust Fund. So what will happen after 2040? Will Social Security stop paying benefits? No. At current tax rates, every year Social Security will continue to collect payroll tax revenue that it will immediately send out to retirees to pay benefits. Payroll taxes collected each year, not bonds or cash piled up in the Trust Fund, have always been the main source of revenue to pay Social Security benefits. However, there will be a serious problem after 2040. Social Security’s chief actuary estimates that, with current tax rates, the payroll tax revenue collected after 2040 will