\# In The News # Is Medical Care the Primary Cause of the Long-Term Budget Problem? In a provocative 2007 article, Brookings Institution economist Henry Aaron contends that there has been a flawed diagnosis in the political arena of the source of the huge long-term fiscal imbalance facing the U.S. government and, as a consequence, a flawed prescription concerning what to do about it.\* He says that if one examines carefully the numbers and projections, it is clear that the main source of the long-term federal budget problem is medical care costs—both Medicare and Medicaid (we noted in the text that Medicare’s fiscal imbalance is much larger than Social Security’s fiscal imbalance). He asserts that the same hospitals, doctors, and nurses that treat the elderly and the poor also treat the nonelderly and the nonpoor, and these providers of medical care would regard it as unethical and impractical to practice medicine differently for the two groups. In particular, the elderly would expect to receive the same quality of medical care that they received before they became old. If costly technology and procedures are used for the nonelderly and nonpoor, then they will also be used for the elderly and the poor. Hence, neither the providers of medical care nor the majority of the public will support making Medicare and Medicaid costs grow more slowly than health care costs for the rest of the population. Thus, Aaron argues, solving the long-term federal budget problem requires solving the medical cost problem for the entire population. He concludes that “rising health care spending is the only source of long-term budget shortfalls” and that “controlling spending under public-sector health care programs cannot proceed independently of control of private-sector health care spending.” If Aaron is right, then the long-term fiscal imbalance problem must be solved in Chapter 6 on health insurance. Aaron asserts that the costs of Medicare and Medicaid—costs for treating the elderly and the poor—cannot be controlled without also controlling medical costs for the nonelderly and the nonpoor. GDP (so spending has been roughly 20% of GDP) and tax revenue, between 16% and 20% of GDP. Thus, on average federal spending has been about 20% of GDP, federal revenue about 18% of GDP, and the federal deficit about 2% of GDP. An important component of federal spending is national defense, which constitutes about 4% of GDP and 20% (4% out of 20%) of federal spending. However, in this section we do not emphasize defense spending in our long-term budget outlook because most analysts do not expect defense spending to rise significantly above 4% of GDP. Look back at Table 1.2 of Chapter 1. Based on projections of population demographics and medical costs (see the box above), the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that spending on Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security—the “big three” domestic (nondefense) programs—will rise from 10% of GDP in 2010 to 16% in 2040. If the rest of the budget components remain the same as a percentage of GDP, then federal spending will rise from 22% of GDP in 2010 to 28% in 2040. If tax revenue is 20% of GDP (it has never exceeded 20% and has averaged 18% in recent decades), the budget deficit will rise to 8% of GDP in 2040 (compared to its average of 2% of GDP over the past half century). 331 \* Henry Aaron, “Budget Crisis, Entitlement Crisis, Health Care Financing Problem—Which Is It?” Health Affairs, November–December 2007, pp. 1622–33.