\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment $100), while the MD is only $40—so the requirement forces firm H to abate more than is socially optimal. Conversely, abating the 25th unit costs firm L $25; since the MD is $40, it would be socially optimal for L to abate still further. When each firm complies with the government requirement to abate 25 and emit 25, their MACs differ: MACH is $100, while MACL is only $25. Whenever MACs differ, it is possible to reduce the total cost of abatement while achieving the same total abatement: Just let the high MAC firm H abate less and the low MAC firm L abate more. In the diagram, starting from 25, letting firm H abate 1 unit less (emit 1 unit more) avoids a cost of $100, while having firm L abate 1 unit more (emit 1 unit less) incurs a cost of only $25—for a net cost saving of $75 ($100 ⫺ $25), while keeping total abatement the same and total emissions at 50. Starting from 25, when H abates 15 units less (and emits 15 units more, or 40) and L abates 15 units more (and emits 15 units less, or 10), the two MACs become equal ($40), and no further total cost reduction is possible. This is sometimes called the equimarginal principle:

> The total cost incurred to achieve a pollution target has been minimized only if each polluter reduces pollution until its marginal abatement cost is the same as every other polluter.

The reason is simple. If two polluters have unequal MACs, then total cost can be reduced while keeping total pollution the same by having the low MAC firm abate more (and emit less) while having the high MAC firm abate less (and emit more). A policy conclusion follows immediately:

> To induce polluters to equalize their MACs, charge all polluters the same tax per emission of pollutant X.

As long as the same tax per emission is levied on all firms, their MACs will end up equal, because each firm will find it profitable to abate until its MAC equals the tax it faces. Thus, the emissions tax—provided it is the same for all firms emitting the pollutant—will result in equal MACs across firms and will therefore achieve a given total abatement at minimum possible total cost. The message of economists to policy-makers is this: Resist arguments for varying the tax per emission among polluters of chemical X. An extreme variation is a zero tax—in other words, exempting certain polluters from the tax. Firms emitting the same pollutant differ along many dimensions, and firm managers, owners, and workers will present arguments to the government about why their firm’s tax should be low or even zero (an exemption). But if the tax is varied across firms, then MACs will end up unequal, and the reduction in pollution will not be achieved at minimum possible cost. # Tradable Permits Instead of levying a tax, suppose the government requires firms to have a permit for each unit of pollution that it emits; it would be illegal for a firm’s emissions to exceed its permits (punishment would be imposed on the firm or its managers for violating the law). The government decides how much pollution will be tolerated and then supplies exactly that number of permits to firms. This method is called cap and trade because the government puts a cap (ceiling) on the amount of pollution by supplying that amount of permits, and then firms are allowed to trade (buy and sell) permits at whatever price emerges among them in a permit market.