\# Chapter 5 Social Security Now consider this question: Does a collective workers-support-retirees system (the northeast entry in Table 5.1) like the U.S. Social Security system reduce saving, investment, and the capital stock of the economy? The answer depends on the type of system it replaces. If the collective workers-support-retirees system replaces an individual workers-support-retirees system (the northwest entry in Table 5.1), then the answer is no; instead of workers giving transfers to their own parents to consume, the workers give transfers (through payroll taxes) to other parents to consume. However, if a collective workers-support-retirees system replaces a system where each generation is self-sufficient, then the answer is yes. With self-sufficiency, workers save for their own retirement by providing funds to firms to invest in real capital. With a workers-support-retirees system, instead of providing funds to firms to invest in real capital, workers pay taxes that provide funds for retirees to consume. So the capital stock would be lower. Thus, a workers-support-retirees system has two disadvantages relative to a self-sufficient system: First, the rate of return is lower and second, the capital stock and output of the economy are lower. If the current system is workers-support-retirees (like the U.S. Social Security program), it might seem desirable to switch to a system where each generation is self-sufficient. Unfortunately, breaking out of a workers-support-retirees system is hard to do. # Breaking Out Is Hard to Do Suppose a new generation of workers in a workers-support economy wants to become self-sufficient and save for its own retirement. Instead of sending transfers to retirees, these workers decide that they would rather buy bonds and stocks, which upon retirement they would sell to finance their consumption. The obvious problem is this: What happens to current retirees if these workers buy bonds and stocks instead of sending retirees transfers? Clearly, the retirees would be in trouble, and they would feel they had been treated very unfairly; when these retirees were working, they didn’t buy bonds and stocks—instead, they sent transfers to retirees in the expectation that the same would be done for them when they retired. Changing the system on them when they are retired would no doubt make them quite angry. How would you feel if it happened to you? So if a new generation of workers wants to become self-sufficient without ditching retirees, the workers must double-save: They must save (i.e., consume less than their wage income) in order to send transfers to retirees, and then they must save again to buy bonds and stocks for themselves. When they retire, they will sell their bonds and stocks to finance their consumption and will not receive any transfers. If one generation of workers is willing to double-save and receive no transfer from workers when they retire, thenceforth each generation of workers will only have to save once—for itself—by buying bonds and stocks. If the transition from one system to another occurs in a single generation, that generation must double-save while receiving a single benefit. That’s quite a sacrifice for one generation of workers to make. It would be fairer to spread out the sacrifice over several generations. Instead of double saving—saving 100% more—the first generation of workers might save only 50% more. For example, instead of double saving—saving $200 instead of $100—the first generation of workers might save $150, sending $90 to retirees (instead of the $100 retirees were expecting) and saving $60 for itself; and then the second generation of workers might save $150, sending $80 to retirees (instead of the $90 retirees were expecting) and saving $70 for itself. Eventually, a future generation of workers would send nothing to retirees and save only for itself. From then on, each generation would