\# 20 Public Finance If the federal deficit (and hence federal borrowing) is large, then federal debt—how much the federal government owes lenders (bond holders)—grows faster than GDP, and debt as a percentage of GDP increases; if the deficit (and hence borrowing) is small, then debt grows slower than GDP, and debt as a percentage of GDP falls. # 3. Select from the following percentages to complete the paragraph below: 25%, 35%, 50%, 100%. During World War II, the increase in military spending was financed mainly by borrowing so by the end of the war federal debt was over \_\_\_\_% of GDP. Over the next three decades, GDP grew faster than federal debt (borrowing was relatively small) so by the mid-1970s federal debt was down to \_\_\_\_% of GDP. Over the next two decades, greater federal borrowing gradually raised federal debt to \_\_\_\_% of GDP by the mid-1990s, but reduced borrowing and fast GDP growth brought debt down to about \_\_\_\_% of GDP by 2000 where it remains today. The correct answers are 100%, 25%, 50%, 35% respectively; debt as a percentage of GDP since 1965 is shown in Figure 1.12. In the mid-1990s, federal debt was 50% of GDP, and federal interest payments were about 3% of GDP or about 15% of federal spending (3% ⫼ 20% ⫽ 15%). Today federal debt is 35% of GDP, and federal interest payments are 2% of GDP or 10% of federal spending (2% ⫼ 20% ⫽ 10%). Thus, the reduction in debt has reduced the share of federal spending that must be devoted to paying interest. # 4. Choose the correct terms from the following list to complete the paragraph below: personal income, payroll, corporate income, sales, and property. The \_\_\_\_ tax raises about 45% of federal revenue, the \_\_\_\_ tax raises about 35%, and the \_\_\_\_ tax raises about 10%. State revenue comes mainly from the \_\_\_\_ tax and the \_\_\_\_ tax, while local revenue comes mainly from the \_\_\_\_ tax. The correct answers are personal income, payroll, corporate income, sales, personal income, and property, respectively. As shown in Figure 1.13, the personal income tax is the most important source of federal revenue with the payroll tax (FICA on most pay stubs) for Social Security and Medicare a strong second. Although other economically # FIGURE 1.12 # Federal Debt as a Percentage of GDP

| Year | Percentage of GDP |
| ---- | ----------------- |
| 1965 | 25%               |
| 1980 | 50%               |
| 1990 | 45%               |
| 1995 | 35%               |
| 2000 | 35%               |
| 2005 |                   |
