\# Chapter 3 Public Goods and Political Economy The family in the middle of the ranking is called the median voter. As we have just seen, the median voter may be family H, M, or L depending on how cost-shares are assigned. With majority voting, the outcome will be what the median voter prefers. For example, given cost-shares, suppose one family prefers 8 feet, another family prefers 12 feet, and the median voter something between 8 and 12 feet—call it N feet. Then starting from zero feet, all three will vote to increase thickness until 8 feet; two will vote to go to N feet; but then two will vote against going above N feet, so N feet will be the outcome. Note that the outcome may not be the socially optimal quantity (10 feet). If N is 10, then 10 feet will be chosen—the social optimum. But if N is 9 or 11, the social optimum will not be chosen. The socially optimal quantity will be chosen under majority-rule voting if the median voter prefers it; otherwise, not. To get the median voter to prefer the social optimum, it is necessary to assign the median voter the cost-share that will cause that voter to prefer the socially optimal quantity. # Majority-Rule Voting: Single- and Double-Peaked Preferences Thus far, decisions have been made foot by foot: Should the thickness of the wall be raised from 8 to 9 feet, from 9 to 10 feet? We now consider a different way of arriving at a decision. Suppose that, given a particular assignment of cost-shares, family H prefers a thick wall, M prefers an intermediate wall, and L prefers a thin wall, so there is a deadlock. Suppose the families agree to conduct pair-wise votes between two options to try to break the deadlock: Whichever option (thick, intermediate, or thin) wins the first pair-wise vote is then matched against the remaining option. Given cost-shares, the preferences are shown in Table 3.1. For example, H’s first choice is thick, second choice is intermediate, and third choice is thin. For the moment, ignore family D, and assume the three families voting are H, M, and L. If H, M, and L vote between intermediate and thick, then intermediate beats thick because M and L vote for intermediate. If H, M, and L vote between intermediate and thin, then intermediate beats thin because M and H vote for intermediate. With these preferences, pair-wise voting yields a clear winner: intermediate. But if family L were replaced by family D, the result would be different. We will see shortly that D stands for double-peaked preferences. Like L, D’s first choice is thin. But unlike L, D’s third choice is intermediate. Why? D believes that an intermediate wall gives no more protection than a thin wall and so is definitely not worth its additional cost; D believes that to get more real protection the wall must be thick. Hence, D ranks thin first, thick second, and intermediate third. With H, M, and D voting, thick beats intermediate because H and D vote for thick; then thin beats thick because M and D vote for thin; but then intermediate beats thin because M and H vote for intermediate. Thus, none (thick, intermediate, or thin) can defeat the other two. If a pair-wise vote is held,

|                      | Choice | H            | M            | L            | D            |
| -------------------- | ------ | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Majority-Rule Voting | First  | Thick        | Intermediate | Thin         | Thin         |
|                      | Second | Intermediate | Thin         | Intermediate | Thick        |
|                      | Third  | Thin         | Thick        | Thick        | Intermediate |
