\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment Why? Because the first unit that L cuts back has a near-zero MAC. It would therefore be better for H to get L to start cutting back at L’s initially low MAC, and to reimburse L an amount equal to L’s low MAC, than for H to keep cutting back by itself at an ever-rising MAC. It would be better for country H to pay country L $800 to join the treaty (so that L cuts back 40 and H cuts back 10) rather than for H to cut back 50 by itself. The cost to H of cutting back 50 would be $5,000 (from Figure 2.5, the MAC of the 50th unit H cuts back would be $200, so the average MAC is $100, so $100 × 50 = $5,000), whereas if L joins the treaty, the cost to H is only $1,000 ($200 for its own cutback of 10 plus its payment of $800 to L). Of course, country H wants to pay country L the minimum amount needed to get L to join the treaty, while L wants to get as much as it can from H. So there will be tough negotiations over the redistribution formula. # A Carbon Tradable Permits Treaty An alternative way to achieve the minimum cost of cutback for the world would be a tradable permits treaty that would establish an international permit market. The treaty would set a world target for total carbon emissions and would then distribute without charge this total amount of permits among participant country governments according to an agreed upon formula. Each country government would sell (or give) a certain quantity of permits to its own firms that emit carbon and sell the rest of its permits in the international permit market. Each firm in any country that signs the treaty would be required to possess as many permits as it emits; it would meet this requirement by buying or selling permits in the international permit market. Each country government would agree to monitor its own carbon polluters to make sure each polluter emits an amount of carbon no greater than the amount of permits it possesses. If the international permit market runs smoothly, carbon polluters in all countries would face the same permit price and adjust their pollution until their own MAC was equal to that price. Hence, the MACs of all polluters would be equal. How would a tradable permits treaty accomplish the redistribution necessary to induce low-income countries to participate? By using a formula that gives a relatively large number of permits to low-income countries and a relatively small number of permits to high-income countries. Through the international permit market there would then be a transfer of income from high-income countries to low-income countries. In our example, suppose under the treaty formula the government of country L is given 30 permits and the government of country H is given 20 permits. We showed earlier that no matter how the 50 permits are initially distributed between H and L, the price will end up $40, and firms in L will want to emit 10, while firms in H will want to emit 40. So the government of L will sell (or give) 10 permits to its firms and sell 20 permits to the government of H which will then sell (or give) 40 permits to its firms. Thus, the government of L will sell 20 permits at $40 per permit to the government of H, thereby resulting in a redistribution of $800 from country H to country L. # A Hybrid Carbon Treaty: A Permit System with a Safety Valve As noted earlier, it would be possible to implement a hybrid: a permit system with a safety valve. The treaty would set an initial pollution target and distribute the corresponding amount of permits to the governments of all participating countries. But if the market price of a permit rises above the ceiling price adopted under the treaty by participant country governments, the treaty would authorize and implement a prompt