\# 104 Public Finance over time. A plausible rough estimate for the average value (across firms and over time) of the mpk is perhaps about 6% per year. Thus: It seems likely that the rate of return when each generation is self-sufficient would be several percentage points higher than the rate of return when workers support retirees. With each generation self-sufficient, however, it is very important to distinguish between the two cases: individual and collective. With collective saving and investment, each worker receives the same rate of return—the return earned on the huge portfolio of bonds and stocks. With individual saving and investment, each worker receives the rate of return that his own small portfolio earns. His own portfolio will consist of a particular set of bonds and stocks of a particular set of companies. Even if the average mpk in the economy is 6%, the mpk of his set of firms may differ significantly from 6%. Moreover, there may be a significant divergence between the rate of return he receives on his saving from interest, dividends, or capital gains and the mpk of his companies. For example, suppose he buys stock in a corporation that he expects to have an mpk of 6%. Suppose, further, that the corporation does not pay any dividends, so the return will be received entirely in the form of a capital gain—a rise in the price of the stock. If the mpk turns out to be 6%, the stock price should rise 6%, thereby providing a 6% return. However, stock prices depend on psychology as well as the mpk. Sometimes the rise in stock prices is larger than the mpk, but sometimes it’s smaller—sometimes stocks even fall despite a positive mpk. Thus, with individual saving and investment, the rate of return on an individual’s portfolio can diverge sharply from the average mpk in the economy. Even if that average mpk (across firms and over time) is 6%, an individual saver who retires when the stock market is booming might receive a rate of return of 16% (10 points higher), but an individual saver who retires when the stock market has plunged might receive a rate of return of –4% (10 points lower). # The Impact on the Economy Imagine two economies being born. One will provide for retirement by having workers supporting retirees. The second will provide for retirement by having each generation be self-sufficient. Let’s consider each in turn. When the workers-support-retirees economy is born, the first workers don’t save because they know that they will be supported in retirement by the next generation of workers. Therefore, there is no real investment and no accumulation of real capital (i.e., machinery). When the first workers retire, the next generation of workers makes transfers to the retirees; the retirees consume their transfers, so once again, no real investment occurs. Thus, no real capital accumulates in the workers-support-retirees economy. By contrast, when the self-sufficient economy is born, the first workers know that they must save for their own retirement, so they save. Their saving finances real investment by firms so that real capital (i.e., machinery) is produced and accumulates. When the first workers retire, they sell their bonds and stocks—their claims to ownership of the machinery—to the next generation of workers. Thus, the self-sufficient economy operates with a permanent capital stock. Because the self-sufficient economy accumulates more real capital than the workers-support-retirees economy, it generates more output each year.