\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency # A Lump-Sum Tax and the Marginal Tax Rate Instead of these taxes, consider a lump-sum tax—a tax for which the amount owed doesn’t vary with the taxpayer’s behavior (i.e., how much the person works and earns, how much the person consumes and saves, and so on). For example, a tax of $1,000 per person regardless of the person’s income or consumption is a lump-sum tax. A lump-sum tax doesn’t necessarily have to be the same amount for each taxpayer, but the amount owed must be based on some attribute of the taxpayer that can’t be affected by the taxpayer’s behavior. Most citizens would judge a lump-sum tax to be unfair, so it is seldom used. But it is important to understand why a lump-sum tax would have no efficiency loss. None of the BAD triangles in figures 7.8 through 7.10 would occur if only lump-sum taxes were levied. Once a person has paid his lump-sum tax, in Figure 7.8 there would be no wedge between the price he pays for a good and the marginal cost of its production; in Figure 7.9, there would be no wedge between the wage that he receives and his marginal revenue product; in Figure 7.10, there would be no wedge between the return the saver receives and the return the machine generates. Large lump-sum taxes, of course, could impose large direct burdens on taxpayers. But there would be no excess burden—no efficiency loss—resulting from having a person face a wedge when making a behavioral decision. It’s a shame that lump-sum taxes don’t pass the fairness test because they obtain a perfect score on the efficiency test. Look back at Figure 7.9 in which each worker chooses to supply 2,000 hours per year if the after-tax wage is $12; recall that there are 10 workers in this market so that the total number of hours supplied is 20,000. In deciding to work the 2,000th hour, but not the 2,001st hour, what does each worker consider? What matters is not the tax that the worker has paid up to this point on wage income from the first 2,000 hours. What matters is the tax that would be paid on the 2,001st hour. To see this, imagine the worker must pay the same tax on the earnings from 2,000 hours but no further tax starting with the 2,001st hour. Then there would be no tax wedge in Figure 7.9 and no BAD triangle. What matters, then, for efficiency is not the average tax rate (ATR)—the ratio of total taxes paid to total income earned (T/Y). Instead, what matters is the marginal tax rate (MTR)—the ratio of the additional tax to additional income earned (T/Y) from another hour of work. A lump-sum tax may have a high ATR, but its MTR is zero so its efficiency loss is zero. Consider a proportional income tax under which each person pays a tax rate of 25% on all income earned. Then every person, regardless of income, faces a marginal tax rate of 25% and experiences a 25% wedge between the marginal revenue product he generates and the after-tax wage he keeps. For example, a worker who generates $16 keeps $12, and a worker who generates $32 keeps $24; hence every person has a BAD triangle with a 25% tax wedge. Now suppose the proportional income tax is converted to a progressive income tax under which a person’s income up to $50,000 is taxed at a 0% rate (the first $50,000 of income is exempt from tax) and income above $50,000 is taxed at a 50% rate. Then for every person who makes less than $50,000, the marginal tax rate is 0%, there is no tax wedge, and there is no BAD triangle. But for every person who makes more than $50,000, the marginal tax rate is 50%, and there is a 50% tax wedge with its corresponding BAD triangle. Converting the proportional income tax to the progressive income tax reduces inequality in after-tax incomes, decreases the efficiency loss for people making less than $50,000, but increases the efficiency loss for people making more than $50,000.