\# Chapter 13 Government Borrowing in benefits, while others pay less in taxes than they receive in benefits. Generational accounting focuses on how particular generations fare with respect to government taxes and spending. U.S. Treasury debt held by the public—domestic and foreign—was 37% of GDP in 2007. Foreign investors (private and governmental) currently hold almost half—about 45%—of U.S. Treasury debt held by the public. The largest foreign investors are China, Japan, and the U.K. (Britain), who together hold over half of foreign-held U.S. Treasury debt and about 25% of the total U.S. Treasury debt held by the public. Debt as a percentage of GDP rose from 26% in 1980 to 49% in 1993, then fell to 33% in 2001, and rose to 37% in 2007. Excessive debt gives the federal government a motive to generate inflation in order to “inflate away” (or reduce) the real (inflation-adjusted) value of its debt. In contrast to other debtors who would also welcome inflation, the federal government has the power to generate inflation by injecting a combined fiscal-monetary stimulus into the economy that generates excess demand. Fortunately there is a separation of powers that reduces the likelihood of this happening. The Congressional Budget Office projects that spending on Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security (the “big three” federal domestic programs) will rise from 10% of GDP in 2010 to 16% in 2040 due to demographics and medical cost trends unless a way is found to curtail their growth. If the rest of the budget components remain the same as a percentage of GDP, then federal spending will rise from 22% of GDP in 2010 to 28% in 2040. However, federal tax revenue has never exceeded 20% of GDP. Difficult choices loom on the horizon.