\# Public Finance Accomplished by modifying the benefit formula to achieve a gradual reduction in the replacement rate of high earners. This seems reasonable in light of the trend of increasing inequality in favor of high earners. Today, as noted earlier, the benefit formula is governed by three brackets—90%, 32%, and 15%. The first dollars of a retiree’s average indexed monthly earnings are converted into a monthly benefit at a 90% rate, then the next dollars at a 32% rate, and the next dollars at a 15% rate. Gradually reducing the third rate from 15% to, say, 10% would offset some of the increasing inequality that has favored high earners. Instead, the burden can be spread across all retirees by having Social Security switch from wage indexing to price indexing. The current Social Security benefit formula uses wage indexing: It automatically raises a new retiree’s initial monthly benefit at the same rate as wages rise in the economy, so that the replacement rate—the ratio of the initial benefit to the preretirement wage—stays fairly constant over time. The replacement rate for the average worker is currently about 40%. By contrast, under price indexing the replacement rate would decline continuously as time passes because wages generally rise faster than prices (wage growth exceeds price growth by an amount roughly equal to productivity growth). Price indexing would implement a permanent freeze in the inflation-adjusted Social Security benefit, so as inflation-adjusted wages rise over time, the replacement rate would decline. Progressive indexing is a compromise between wage indexing and price indexing. Wage indexing would be retained for low-income workers, while price indexing would be used for high-income workers, and middle-income workers would be subject to an average of the two. With progressive indexing, the largest burden would be borne by high-income retirees and the least burden by low-income retirees. # Making Each Generation Self-Sufficient A more fundamental change in Social Security would be to gradually switch from a workers-support-retirees system to an each-generation-self-sufficient system. As indicated in Table 5.1, this can be done in two different ways: collectively or individually. Thus, starting from the northeast cell in Table 5.1, it would be possible to move either straight down to the southeast cell—collective self-sufficiency—or to the southwest cell—individual self-sufficiency. We consider each in turn. It is important to emphasize our earlier point that breaking out is hard to do. Switching would appear very attractive to workers if they did not have to continue supporting retirees who contributed under the old system. If workers are told that they can send their payroll tax to either their own individual investment account or to their own generation’s investment account, so that bonds and stocks would accumulate for their own benefit, the proposal sounds attractive. The problem is that the proposal involves diverting payroll taxes that would have gone to current retirees. To switch without reneging on obligations to current retirees, workers must make additional contributions above current payroll taxes. Is there any way out of this dilemma? A false escape is borrowing. Understandably, workers might ask, “Can’t we divert our payroll tax to our own individual or generational account and borrow to meet our obligation to current retirees?” Borrowing does indeed postpone bearing a burden—but it does not escape it. Whoever must pay the interest will bear the burden. So if workers divert their payroll taxes and the government borrows to pay current retirees, workers in the future will have to pay additional taxes to finance the interest payments that the government will owe on its borrowing. Thus, there is no permanent escape for workers through government borrowing.