\# Public Finance of $50, they would demand 110 (point J). Thus, starting from a price of $100, a 50% cut in the price that they must pay would raise their demand 10%; as noted earlier, this is what the RAND experiment estimated—an elasticity of 0.2 (10% 50% 0.2). With no insurance, S and D intersect at point O, so the price is $100 and the quantity of medical care is 100 units. The 75% insurance causes the demand curve to rotate upward (clockwise), pivoting around the point (120, $0), so that each point on the new D curve is four times higher than the point directly below it on the original D curve. Why? Consider the point (100, $400) on the new D curve. If medical providers charged a price of $400, the insurance company would pay 75%, or $300, and patients would pay 25%, or $100, so the out-of-pocket (effective) price to patients would be $100, and patients would therefore demand a quantity of 100, just as they did when they faced a price of $100 without insurance. The new D curve intersects the S curve at a point F which has a higher price and quantity than point O—for example, (110, $200) as shown. The price charged by the suppliers of medical care has been bid up from $100 to $200 due to the rotation upward (clockwise) of the demand curve; the subsidy has increased consumer demand (shifting up the demand curve), resulting in a higher price and quantity. But note that the out-of-pocket price faced by patients is 25% of $200, or $50, indicated at point J. This fall in the out-of-pocket price from $100 (at point O) to $50 (at point J) induces patients to expand their use—in this example, from 100 to 110. It is worth taking a moment to consider what would happen if the insurance had been 100%. The higher the subsidy rate, the more the demand curve rotates upward (clockwise) toward the vertical position D, so at first glance it might seem that the market would move to where a vertical demand curve (D) that goes straight up from point (120, $0) would intersect the supply curve—point G. With straight-line supply and demand curves, as shown, intersection of supply with this vertical demand curve would occur at point G (120, $300). But rather than stop at G, price would continue to rise. Why? As long as the subsidy rate is less than 100%, patients prefer to buy from the medical provider that charges the lowest price for a given quality. But what happens when the subsidy rate reaches 100%? Then patients don’t care about the price. Any provider can raise its price above another provider without fear of losing any customers. In fact, with a 100% subsidy rate, raising quality is the only way for providers to attract consumers, so providers would compete by raising quality, cost, and price—without any apparent limit. A 100% subsidy gradually “explodes” the market, like a rocket launching upward from point (120, $0). # The Impact of Insurance on Efficiency and Redistribution # Inefficiency If There Is No Externality In Chapter 1, we explained why any tax or subsidy causes an efficiency loss (a BAD triangle) if there is no externality. The price subsidy due to insurance causes a standard efficiency loss if there is no externality. To see the efficiency loss from the insurance price subsidy, redraw points F and J and the S curve from Figure 6.1 in Figure 6.2. Through point J draw the marginal benefit (MB) curve. The MB curve shows how many dollars this sick person would have to be given to keep her utility the same if she had to give up that unit of medical care. If the consumer had to give up the 110th unit of medical care, she would have to be given $50 to keep her utility the same. But if the 110th unit were not produced, the resources saved would be $200—the marginal cost (MC)—so she could be given $50, and other