\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance scale (RBRVS) for doctor fees, setting the fee it would pay for each service according to its cost (including medical school training). # A Medicare Voucher It has been proposed that retirees be given a Medicare voucher that they can use to buy insurance from private companies. With a voucher system, Medicare would provide premium support rather than be the insurer. Advocates say a voucher system would accomplish two objectives. First, Congress would get better control over its Medicare expenditure; its expenditure would equal the voucher amount set by Congress times the number of retirees. Second, retirees would have a choice among insurance companies and plans so insurers would have to compete for retirees. As we discussed earlier, competition by health insurers for individual enrollees has serious problems. Such a competition tends to result in each individual being charged a premium equal to her expected medical cost—and if that expected cost is very high, a simple refusal to provide insurance. Because older people often have documented medical problems, premiums would on average be high and might vary dramatically across individuals. It might be possible to contain these problems by varying the amount of premium support according to the individual’s health status (called risk adjustment) and income, or by imposing regulations on how much insurers can vary premiums (or reject individuals). However, it is unclear whether this can be done satisfactorily for the majority of elderly people. # Medicare Prescription Drug Coverage When Medicare was enacted in 1965, it did not cover prescription drugs. In the next decades, effective but expensive prescription drugs were developed by pharmaceutical companies, and Medicare’s omission became more important. As a result, many retirees became increasingly concerned about Medicare’s omission. There were two sources of resistance to having Medicare cover prescription drugs. First, the cost of coverage would require either an increase in taxes or in premiums for retirees. Second, pharmaceutical companies generally opposed coverage, because they feared that it would lead to Medicare’s setting prices for drugs, just as it had for hospitals and doctors. The Medicare Modernization Act of 2003 finally added prescription drug coverage to Medicare (part D), but with the compromise that private insurance companies, not Medicare, would directly interact with drug companies and patients, thereby making it less likely that Medicare would set prices. Medicare’s prescription drug program actually began in 2006. Medicare requires the private insurance companies to utilize a patient cost-sharing schedule. While poor patients get their cost sharing paid by Medicaid, nonpoor retirees are prohibited from getting their cost sharing paid by a private (medigap) insurer, because the aim is to keep most retirees concerned about drug prices. In 2008, under the standard schedule, patients are required to pay the first $275 of prescription drug costs, 25% of drug costs between $275 and $2,510, 100% of costs between $2,510 and $5,726 (this range of $3,216 where patients get no help is called the doughnut hole), and, finally, 5% of any drug costs above $5,726. Why did Congress leave a doughnut hole? To hold down the federal budget cost of the drug coverage. # Income-Related Patient Cost Sharing Medicare’s current cost sharing for drugs does not vary with a patient’s income. Another way to limit budget cost of the Medicare prescription drug program would be to make each patient’s cost-share vary with the patient’s income using each patient’s previous.