\# Public Finance Bill so that medical care is free to patients, price-responsive patients will demand 20% more medical care. How does the 20% expansion of use by the 95% strike you? It should strike you as wasteful. The main purpose of insurance is to prevent a huge burden like $61,000. But a side effect of the insurance is to induce the 95% to expand their use by 20%—from $1,000 to $1,200—solely because the insurance makes additional medical care free to them. Of course, this additional medical care is not free to society—producing this additional medical care absorbs resources that could have been used to make other goods and services. As a consequence of inflating their use of medical care, people end up paying a premium that is 20% higher ($4,800 instead of $4,000). This is just like the waste induced by splitting the bill at a restaurant. Suppose ten people go to a restaurant and agree in advance that, instead of individual checks, each will pay one-tenth of the total bill. Each person realizes that if she inflates her order, it will hardly affect the amount she pays. For example, if she orders wine A that has a price $10 higher than wine B, it will raise her share of the bill by only $1. So each person inflates her order. In the end, of course, each person feels the effects of the wasteful overordering because each must pay one-tenth of a highly inflated bill, and each person concludes that it would have been better to use individual checks. There is a way to achieve the main purpose of insurance—preventing a huge burden on the 5%—without inducing wasteful expansion by the 95%: catastrophic insurance. Thus far we’ve assumed that insurance always pays the entire bill for every person. Under catastrophic insurance, the insurance company will pay the entire medical bill above a threshold—for example, $5,200. The person will have to pay the first $5,200 of a hospital bill—hence, under this catastrophic insurance policy, the patient will have a deductible of $5,200. The strategy behind catastrophic insurance should be obvious. The 95% won’t inflate their use because they’ll bear the full burden of their own ordering. The insurance will be restricted to the 5%, reducing their burden from $61,000 to $5,200 plus the premium. If your insurance company sold catastrophic insurance, what premium would you have to charge to be able to pay the excess of any medical bill over $5,200? For 95% of your enrollees who incur a $1,000 medical bill, you won’t have to pay anything. The 5% with a hospital episode will each incur a $73,200 bill (after paying the first $5,200, additional medical care will be free to the 5% so they will use 20% more than $61,000), of which you will pay $73,200 - $5,200 = $68,000. Thus, the expected value of your payment per enrollee is 0.05($68,000) + 0.95($0) = $3,400 so $3,400 is what you must charge to each customer (plus the amount needed to cover operating costs). Consider three insurance coverage choices shown in Table 6.2: none, complete, or catastrophic. “None” would be too risky for most people—they would have a 5% chance of bearing a $61,000 burden. “Complete” entails a $4,800 burden.

| Insurance Coverage | Out-of-Pocket Burden | Total Burden |           |            |        |
| ------------------ | -------------------- | ------------ | --------- | ---------- | ------ |
| Premium            | 5% Chance            | 95% Chance   | 5% Chance | 95% Chance |        |
| None               | $0                   | $61,000      | $1,000    | $61,000    | $1,000 |
| Complete           | $4,800               | 0            | 0         | $4,800     | $4,800 |
| Catastrophic       | $3,400               | $5,200       | $1,000    | $8,600     | $4,400 |
