\# Public Finance Medicaid is an all or none program: Either a family qualifies or it doesn’t. If the family qualifies, it gets medical care for free.1 However, if its income and assets rise above certain thresholds, the family loses its Medicaid coverage. Taking a job often means losing Medicaid eligibility, so unless the job provides health insurance or enough income to buy health insurance, Medicaid recipients may be reluctant to take the job. The solution to this problem is to make sure that people who take jobs are able to obtain and afford health insurance. # The Earned Income Tax Credit The Earned Income Tax Credit provides about $40 billion in assistance to about 20 million low-income families that earn income by working. The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a work bonus. Unless a household actually earns labor income, it does not receive an EITC. An EITC has to be “earned” by working. Initially, the more wage income earned, the greater the EITC until a maximum is reached; then as further income is earned, the EITC is gradually phased out. The dollar amount of the EITC at each level of income depends on the number of children. For a married couple with two or more children, the EITC reaches its maximum, roughly $4,800, when income reaches about $12,000, and phases out completely when income reaches about $40,000. A household is ineligible for the EITC if its investment income exceeds about $3,000 (because this implies that it probably has about $100,000 in wealth, assuming a 3% return). All dollar amounts in the EITC are indexed to increase automatically each year with wage income in the economy. A household receives its EITC annually by filing a federal income tax return reporting its labor earnings, investment income, and number of children. After its tax return is processed, the household receives a check from the U.S. Treasury. For example, suppose the family’s EITC is $2,400; if it would otherwise owe no federal income tax, it receives a $2,400 check; if the family would otherwise owe $400 in federal income tax, it receives a $2,000 check. The EITC is called a refundable tax credit, because it triggers a check from the U.S. Treasury as though the household were obtaining a tax refund. # Figure 12.1 Figure 12.1 shows the fundamental difference between the EITC and welfare.

| The EITC and Welfare                  |                                |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| EITC                                  | Welfare                        |
| If there is no work, there is no EITC | but welfare is at its maximum. |
| Benefit                               | Benefit                        |
| Earnings                              | Earnings                       |
| (a)                                   | (b)                            |
