\# Public Finance Tax Revenue from the Major Federal Taxes for Two Years

|                                  |          |                      |          |                      |
| -------------------------------- | -------- | -------------------- | -------- | -------------------- |
| 1999                             | 2005     |                      |          |                      |
|                                  | % of GDP | % of Federal Revenue | % of GDP | % of Federal Revenue |
| Household income taxes           | 9.6%     | 48%                  | 7.5%     | 43%                  |
| Payroll taxes (social insurance) | 6.7      | 34                   | 6.5      | 37                   |
| Corporate income taxes           | 2.0      | 10                   | 2.3      | 13                   |
| Excise taxes                     | 0.8      | 4                    | 0.6      | 3                    |
| Estate and gift taxes            | 0.3      | 1                    | 0.2      | 1                    |
| Customs duties (tariffs)         | 0.2      | 1                    | 0.2      | 1                    |
| Other revenues                   | 0.4      | 2                    | 0.3      | 2                    |
| Total                            | 20.0%    | 100%                 | 17.5%    | 100%                 |

It should have paid, the household requests a refund of the difference and will receive a check from the U.S. Treasury within a month or two of filing its return. Thus, filing a tax return involves an adjustment for any difference between what the household has already paid and what it should have paid. The household income tax (called the “individual” income tax, whether it applies to single persons or married couples) raises about 45% of all federal government revenue—more revenue than any other federal tax. Table 8.1 shows tax revenue from the major federal taxes for two years when the economy was not in recession, 1999 and 2005. In 1999, federal revenue was 20.0% of GDP; the individual income tax was nearly 10% of GDP and provided 48% of federal revenue. In 2005, after several rounds of household income tax cuts between 2001 and 2003, federal revenue was 17.5% of GDP; the individual income tax was 7.5% of GDP and provided 43% of federal revenue. The payroll tax, which is a labor income tax, is the second most important source of federal revenue. The corporate income tax is third. In contrast to most other economically advanced countries, the U.S. federal government does not have a broad-based consumption tax such as a retail sales tax or value-added tax; it has a set of excise taxes—taxes on particular commodities such as gasoline, alcohol, and tobacco—that contribute a small share of federal revenue. Estate and gift taxes and customs duties (tariffs) also contribute a small share. In the United States, state governments rely primarily on sales taxes and income taxes, while local governments rely primarily on property taxes. We discuss state and local public finance in Chapter 10. # MECHANICS OF THE U.S. INCOME TAX # Determining Your Income Tax Imagine you and your spouse are both employed in the year 2008. Assume the only investment income you have is interest income; you have no dividends or capital gains from corporate stocks. On or before April 15, 2009, you file a 2008 income tax return (a 1040) for the income you both earned from January 1 through December 31, 2008. You add up your income for 2008, make certain subtractions, and follow 1040 instructions to determine the tax you owe for 2008. During 2008, your employers have withheld income tax from each of your paychecks and sent the withheld tax in your names to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of the U.S. government’s Department of the Treasury, so the IRS has already collected.