\# Chapter 5 Social Security # Collective Self-Sufficiency Under collective self-sufficiency, each generation would pay payroll taxes into the Social Security Trust Fund, which would use the revenue to buy financial assets (government bonds and perhaps also corporate bonds and stocks) for that generation of workers. When that generation retired, the Trust Fund would sell their financial assets and use the proceeds to pay that generation’s benefits. Total benefits paid to a generation of retirees would equal total proceeds from the sale of bonds and stocks accumulated by that generation. Thus, in any given year, the Trust Fund would be selling financial assets for retirees and buying financial assets for workers. For example, the Trust Fund might sell $100 billion of bonds for retirees to pay benefits and use the $300 billion of payroll tax revenue to buy bonds for workers. An observer would see that the Trust Fund had collected $300 billion in payroll tax revenue, paid $100 billion in benefits, and increased its holding of bonds by $200 billion. # How would each individual retiree’s benefit be determined? One option would be to give each retiree a share of the total benefits equal to the share of his generation’s payroll taxes that he paid. Another option would be to give a low-income retiree a share greater than he paid, and the reverse for a high-income retiree. Thus, with a collective system, Congress could implement partial redistribution (as it does under the current Social Security program). Also, with a collective system, Congress could give each retiree an inflation-protected annuity—a benefit payment adjusted annually for inflation for as long as the retiree lives (as it does under the current Social Security program). # Individual Self-Sufficiency: Individual Investment Accounts Under individual self-sufficiency, each individual would pay payroll taxes into his own individual Social Security investment fund and purchase financial assets (government bonds, corporate bonds, and corporate stocks). When that individual retired, the individual would sell his bonds and stocks and use the proceeds to withdraw retirement benefits. Each retiree’s benefits would equal total proceeds from the sale of that individual’s bonds and stocks, so each individual would receive back whatever his own portfolio accumulated. Each individual would decide whether to buy an annuity at retirement. Any part of the retiree’s portfolio that is not used to buy an annuity can be left as a bequest to his heirs when he dies. Although each worker would be required to pay a payroll tax, he would rightly regard it as his own personal saving, so the tax should have no negative effect on his work effort. This approach would make each individual independent of the next generation and of the government for his own retirement. His retirement benefits would depend on the fate of his own investment portfolio. Everyone agrees that it is a good thing for individuals to accumulate funds in their own investment accounts. The disagreement is over whether such accounts should be part of Social Security or “on top of” Social Security. One side believes such accounts should be separate from Social Security: Social Security should remain a workers-support-retirees defined-benefit plan, and individuals should be encouraged through tax advantages to build their own individual investment funds as a supplement to Social Security. The other side believes such defined-contribution accounts should be part of Social Security. # Combinations and Compromises Rather than choose one of the “pure” approaches just discussed, the U.S. Congress may consider various combinations and compromises that include elements of different...