\# Public Finance Individuals have a large sum that they divide between charities and heirs—the portion given to charities is not taxed, whereas the portion given to heirs is taxed. The rest of this chapter focuses on assistance to low-income people that is provided by direct government expenditures or refundable tax credits. # FEDERAL SPENDING TO ASSIST LOW-INCOME PEOPLE Table 12.1 shows federal spending on selected social insurance and income support programs ranked according to dollars spent. The “big three” are Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Of course Social Security and Medicare provide assistance to people of all income levels, as well as to low-income people. Programs that are targeted to assist only low-income people are called means-tested programs because a person’s eligibility for a benefit depends on whether the person’s income and/or wealth—the person’s “means”—is sufficiently low. The program requires that applicants provide information about their means: either their income or assets (wealth) or both. It should be noted that the income tax is also means-tested: How much tax a person owes depends on her income; the required information is provided on a tax return. If a means-tested program is run separately from the federal income tax, the applicant must supply income and possibly asset information to the program. Alternatively, as explained later in this chapter, a means-tested program can be run through the annual income tax process for which households already supply information about their income; the program can use refundable income tax credits to deliver benefits that can vary with household income as reported on the tax return. Table 12.1 suggests that most citizens care about why a family is poor and how money is spent to help them. Citizens are willing to spend a very large sum to provide medical care to poor people (Medicaid). They support targeting money for food (food stamps and child nutrition). They support aid to the blind and disabled, to low-income families in which someone is actually working and earning income, and to workers who have been laid off (unemployment insurance). Their support for welfare—cash benefits to low-income single mothers with children—is much less than their support for medical care and food for these same families. # Unrestricted versus Restricted Assistance Should low-income assistance take the form of unrestricted cash, or should the assistance be restricted in some way (e.g., Medicaid, food stamps, and rental housing supplements)? Restricted assistance can be cash (e.g., a refundable tax credit to

| Program                             | Spending ($ Billions) |
| ----------------------------------- | --------------------- |
| Social Security                     | $581                  |
| Medicare                            | $436                  |
| Medicaid                            | $191                  |
| Earned income and child tax credits | $54                   |
| Aged, blind, disabled               | $36                   |
| Food stamps                         | $35                   |
| Unemployment insurance              | $33                   |
| Welfare family support              | $24                   |
| Child nutrition                     | $14                   |
| Foster care                         | $7                    |
| State children’s health insurance   | $6                    |

Source: Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2008 to 2018 (January 2008), Table 3-3, pp. 56–57.