\# 132 Public Finance # HEALTH INSURANCE IN THE UNITED STATES There have been great advances in medical care over the past half century, but they have come at considerable cost:

* From 1960 to 2007, spending on medical care in the United States rose from 5% to 16% of GDP.
* The United States devotes a much larger share of GDP to medical care than other countries:
* Economically advanced countries on average spend about 10% of GDP on medical care.
* No other country spends over 12% of GDP.
* Britain only spends about 8% of GDP.

The United States’ high and rising medical share of GDP should prompt an examination of whether incentives are in place to induce an optimal balancing of the benefits of medical care against its costs and to promote efficiency in the delivery of medical care. It is important to recognize that the health and longevity of a population depends on much more than medical care. Diet, exercise, lifestyle, tobacco, alcohol, drugs, income, education, climate, geography, and genetics are all important determinants of health and longevity. Although the United States spends a much higher percentage of its GDP on medical care than other countries, the health and longevity of the U.S. population is not always better than other countries. This does not necessarily imply that higher medical care spending is unhelpful. It may mean that poor performance on other determinants of health and longevity may be overwhelming the benefits from more medical care. The majority of people in the United States—roughly 60%—have health insurance coverage through private insurance; most of these obtain their private insurance at their workplace. About 90% of people with private insurance have coverage through their workplace; the other 10% buy insurance individually. Private health insurance plans vary considerably: Some cover virtually all medical services and pay virtually the entire bill; others exclude many medical services and pay only a limited portion of the bill. It is therefore misleading to simply characterize a person as uninsured or insured—the degree of insurance matters and varies greatly among the insured. Roughly 25% of the population have health insurance coverage through the government—roughly half of these (the elderly) are covered by Medicare and half (the poor) by Medicaid. But a significant minority—roughly 15% of the population (over 45 million people)—are uninsured. Some turn down the opportunity to be insured, but others are not given the opportunity at an affordable price. The uninsured are virtually always given hospital care for medical emergencies, but they then bear a substantial financial burden and impose a large cost on others who end up paying a large share of the bill for their hospital episode. The uninsured often avoid or delay medical care until it is too late or very costly, and they generally obtain less care than the insured. Some insured people discover, during a costly medical episode, that their insurance plan won’t pay because the episode is related to a preexisting condition—a medical condition that the patient had prior to joining the insurance plan. Insured people sometimes discover that their plan will not pay for certain medical services or it will pay only a limited amount for particular services, so that they must pay a large share of the price of the services they received.