\# 324 Public Finance without giving them benefits. As time passes, eventually each new adult generation that pays taxes had benefited from the public schools when they were young. A natural measure of how a particular generation fares with respect to government is the present value of the benefits it receives minus the present value of the taxes it pays. Note that the interest rate chosen to compute present value affects the dollar amount of the present value. By this measure, the people who were retirees when Social Security and Medicare were introduced gained an amount equal to the present value of the benefits they received minus the present value of the taxes they paid (zero). The people who retired a decade after these programs were introduced received a smaller gain because they paid taxes for a decade before receiving benefits. Suppose that, starting from an initially balanced budget, the government cuts taxes and keeps government spending constant by borrowing. Today’s taxpayers use the tax cut to raise their consumption. In the future, the government must pay interest to bondholders and finance the interest payments by raising taxes on future taxpayers. Today’s tax cut therefore benefits today’s taxpayers and harms future taxpayers. Today’s generation gains, and tomorrow’s generation loses. Generational accounting makes the important point that some generations (or age cohorts) get a better or worse deal from government spending and taxes than do other generations. Moreover, generational accounting tries to quantify how much better or worse is the deal. Finally, it alerts citizens and policy makers to assess the impact on different generations (or age cohorts) of particular fiscal actions (spending, taxing, and borrowing) by the government.2 # DEFICITS, DEBT, AND INTEREST # U.S. Deficits, Debt, and Interest during the Past Half Century The U.S. federal government’s gross debt can be divided into two components: debt held by the public (domestic and foreign) and debt held by federal government agencies such as the Social Security Trust Fund. The box “Deficits and Debt with Two Components of Government” gives a simple example of deficits and debt when the government is divided into two components. # U.S. Treasury Debt Held by the Public and by U.S. Government Agencies As shown in Table 13.1, in 2007 U.S. Treasury debt held by the public was about $5 trillion ($5,000 billion) and U.S. Treasury debt held by U.S. government agencies (including Social Security) was about $4 trillion, so total U.S. Treasury debt was about $9 trillion. The total $9 trillion is called gross debt, and the $5 trillion held by the public is sometimes called net debt. For comparison, U.S. GDP in 2007 was about $14 trillion, so net debt was about 37% of GDP and gross debt was about 63% of GDP.3 U.S. Treasury debt held by the public (roughly $5 trillion) arises from past deficits in the federal budget. To finance a deficit (spending in excess of taxes), remember that the U.S. Treasury sells securities (i.e., “bonds”) to various members of the public—households, businesses, and governments, both domestic and foreign. ² Alan Auerbach, Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence Kotlikoff, “Generational Accounting: A Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting,” in Tax Policy and the Economy 5, James Poterba, ed. (MIT Press 1991), pp. 55–110; Laurence Kotlikoff, Generational Accounting (The Free Press, 1992); and Laurence Kotlikoff and Scott Burns, The Coming Generational Storm (The MIT Press, 2004). ³ Using the rounded numbers $5 and $14, $5/$14 36%; more exact numbers yield 37%, so 37% is reported both in the text and in Table 13.1.