\# 306 Public Finance Why aren’t medical benefits included in assessing poverty? Defenders of the exclusion claim that it is not obvious how to calculate a family’s benefit from Medicaid. They note, correctly, that Medicaid is insurance, so it has value even to families that don’t use medical care in a given year. But Medicaid’s insurance value can be measured as Medicaid’s total expenditure divided by the total number of families covered—that is, Medicaid’s per capita expenditure can be included in each covered family’s income. To assess the case for inclusion of the benefits from all government programs in measuring poverty, imagine a society that initially has no government programs for low-income families. Now imagine that all the government programs are enacted: Medicare, Medicaid, food stamps, the EITC, and so on. According to the official definition, these programs have no effect on poverty. Now suppose that instead of enacting all these programs, the government gives families an amount of cash welfare equal to the amount spent on these government programs. The official measure of the number of families in poverty would drop significantly. The enactment of the set of government programs would have no effect on the official measure of poverty, but the enactment of an equal amount of cash welfare would have a large effect. # REFUNDABLE TAX CREDITS The EITC is a refundable tax credit that delivers cash assistance to low-income households through the annual federal income tax process. By contrast, tax deductions, tax exclusions, or ordinary tax credits cannot help low-income households who owe little or no income tax. Currently there are very few refundable tax credits, but it would be possible to assist low-income households by converting current tax deductions, tax exclusions, or ordinary tax credits to refundable tax credits. The advantage of a set of refundable tax credits for particular categories rather than a single refundable tax credit that can be used for any purpose (unrestricted cash assistance) is that taxpayers may get utility when recipients use their money for certain purposes (medical care or education) rather than others (expensive entertainment or fancy clothes). Let’s consider several categorical refundable tax credits that have been proposed but have not yet been enacted.

* **Home ownership:** The current mortgage interest deduction could be converted to a refundable tax credit for a home purchase. For example, any household could claim a refundable credit equal to X% of the home purchase expense up to a $50,000 expenditure where X would decline as income rises.
* **Retirement saving:** The current individual retirement account deduction and the current ordinary tax credit for retirement saving could be converted to a refundable tax credit for retirement saving. For example, any household could claim a refundable credit equal to X% of its saving in a retirement account up to $2,000 of saving where X would decline as income rises.
* **Higher education:** The current ordinary tax credit for higher education tuition could be converted to a refundable tax credit. For example, any household could claim a refundable credit equal to X% of its tuition expense up to a $5,000 expenditure where X would decline as income rises.
* **Health insurance:** The current exclusion of an employer’s expenditure on health insurance for an employee (from the employee’s total income on her 1040 income tax return) could be converted to a refundable tax credit for health insurance.