\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency the ocean far below. Only $90,000 worth of goods is left for you. “What a waste!” you cry out as you think about how you could have enjoyed consuming the lost $10,000. Now imagine that you are promised $100,000 of your favorite goods, but when you arrive, you find that the mix of goods has been changed and is no longer your favorite mix. You judge that the changing of the mix has the same effect on you as dumping $10,000 of your favorite goods in the ocean, leaving you with only $90,000 of your favorite goods. Economists say that this changing of the mix has caused an efficiency loss of $10,000—and you should think of it as equivalent to dumping goods you could have enjoyed into the ocean. A tax usually causes an efficiency loss by causing an unfavorable change in the mix of goods. For example, a tax on a particular good usually causes less of that particular good to be produced and consumed and more of the untaxed goods to be produced and consumed. A tax on labor income causes less work and therefore, less goods that are produced from work, and causes more of the good called “leisure”—hence the mix of goods shifts toward leisure. A tax on capital income causes less saving and more goods consumed in the present, but less goods consumed in the future—the mix of goods shifts toward present goods and away from future goods. There are at least four other equivalent terms for the efficiency loss from a tax: the deadweight loss from the tax, the welfare loss from the tax, the welfare cost of the tax, and the excess burden of the tax. Economists do more than simply identify the existence of an efficiency loss from a particular tax. We try to estimate the magnitude of the efficiency loss. The magnitude is important. Consider two different taxes that raise the same total tax revenue. Suppose the first tax causes an efficiency loss of $15,000, while the second causes an efficiency loss of $5,000. The first should be thought of as causing $15,000 of your favorite goods to be dumped in the ocean, the second only $5,000. Clearly, you should prefer that the second tax, not the first, be used to raise the required revenue, unless there are other reasons to prefer the first tax. There is another way to think about the efficiency loss from a tax. A tax changes the mix of goods (how many units of good A, how many units of good B, and so on) and results in a particular pattern of well-being (utility) among individuals. Starting from that original mix and pattern of utility, would it be possible to change the mix and distribute this new mix among individuals, so that some are better off (achieve higher utility) while none are worse off (experience lower utility)? If the answer is yes, then we say that the tax has caused an efficiency loss. Then we ask: How much better off could people have been with this new mix? Suppose the answer is that they could have been made $15,000 better off—that is, changing the mix and distributing it would have had the same effect on their well-being (utility) as distributing $15,000 to them. Then we say that the efficiency loss from the tax is $15,000. Whether the efficiency loss from taxes is small or large may influence how much to spend on government programs. Suppose it turns out that all taxes cause large efficiency losses. Then we should reconsider whether the government program is really worth imposing the taxes. If the tax causes 10%—$10,000 out of $100,000—to be dumped in the ocean, maybe the government program is good enough to justify the efficiency loss, but if the tax causes 40%—$40,000 out of $100,000—to be dumped in the ocean, maybe the government program is not good enough to justify the efficiency loss. The magnitude of the efficiency loss from taxes should influence the magnitude of government spending that is chosen. It should be emphasized that inefficiency is not the only criterion that should be used to judge particular taxes. One tax might cause a larger efficiency loss than another tax,