\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency The substitution effect in itself would reduce present consumption—as drawn, by $20 from $500 to $480—hence, it would increase saving by $20, from $500 to $520. Note an important point: The substitution effect holds the person’s utility constant because the person moves along the initial indifference curve. Another way to describe the substitution effect—the move from A to s—is to imagine that when the after-tax interest rate rises from 6% to 9%, instead of letting the person move to point B and achieve a higher utility, we “compensate” for this utility-raising effect by simultaneously taking away enough income from the person to shift his budget line parallel southwest from B until it is tangent to the original indifference curve at point s, so that instead of moving from A to B, he only moves from A to s. The substitution effect is sometimes called the compensated effect of a price increase. In the bottom panel of the diagram, the move from A to s is plotted in the saving supply diagram. When the after-tax interest rate rises from 6% to 9%, we simultaneously compensate for this by taking away enough income to keep the person on the initial indifference curve (thereby holding his utility constant); saving would increase by $20 from $500 to $520 (corresponding to the reduction in present consumption from $500 to $480). We call the curve joining points A and s the compensated saving supply curve (Scomp). As the after-tax interest rate rises along the compensated saving supply curve, the person’s utility remains constant because of the simultaneous removal of income. When the after-tax interest rate rises from 6% to 9%, the person doesn’t actually move from point A to point s; he moves from point A to point B. Why does he end up at B instead of s? Because the rise in the after-tax interest rate makes the person richer and enables him to reach a higher indifference curve and a higher utility. It is as though, starting from point s with the slope of –1.09, the person was given income that moves his budget line parallel in a northeast direction until it reaches point B. The move from s to B is called the income effect. Note that the move from s to B in itself would increase present consumption (assuming present consumption is a normal good)—as drawn, by $20, from $480 to $500. The income effect raises the person’s utility because it moves the person to a higher indifference curve. For this person, it just happens that the income and substitution effects have exactly the same magnitude ($20) and exactly offset each other, so the person keeps present consumption constant ($500) by moving from A to B when the after-tax interest rate rises. Consider another person for whom point B would be northwest (instead of directly north) of point A (the substitution effect to the left would be larger than the income effect to the right). That person would decrease present consumption moving from A to B—hence, increase saving—when the after-tax interest rate rises, so the person’s ordinary saving supply curve would have a positive slope (instead of being vertical). Consider another person for whom point B would be northeast (instead of directly north) of point A (the substitution effect to the left would be smaller than the income effect to the right). That person would increase present consumption—hence, decrease saving—when the after-tax interest rate rises so the person’s ordinary saving supply curve would have a negative slope (instead of being vertical). # THE EFFICIENCY LOSS FROM A TAX ON A GOOD In the discussion of Figure 7.8 it was noted in a footnote that the D curve in the diagram used to construct the BAD triangle is the compensated demand curve, not the ordinary demand curve. Here we explain why.