\# Public Finance # THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN MAKING A FREE MARKET POSSIBLE In a state of nature with no government, there would be no free market. A free market consists of the voluntary interaction of producers and consumers of goods and services. Without a government, criminals would prey on productive people, stealing the goods they produce and the income they earn. Anticipating theft, potentially productive people would stop producing. Almost everyone agrees that a government is necessary to protect producers and their property and thereby to make a free market possible. True, it is possible to imagine private vigilante groups trying to protect themselves from criminals. But most agree that it would be much more effective to establish a government to provide protection for everyone against criminals. Thus, there is little dispute that a government should be established to operate a police force and a court system to protect private property and make a free market possible. Of course, only a small limited government with low taxes would be needed to protect property and make possible a free market. So the question becomes: Is it necessary or desirable for government to do more than protect people and their property from criminals? To answer this question, we must first appreciate why the free market usually works well for consumers and also appreciate why it nevertheless has certain particular problems that may provide a reason for further government intervention. # WHY THE FREE MARKET USUALLY WORKS WELL FOR CONSUMERS It is not hard to see why the free market usually works well for consumers. Producers can profit only if they produce what consumers want and avoid producing what consumers don’t want. Producers can profit by offering consumers higher quality at the same price as the competition or the same quality at a lower price than the competition. Producers of the same quality product can retain customers and profit only if they charge a price no higher than their competitors. The lower their cost, the lower the price they can afford to charge, so producers have an incentive to try to hold costs down by more efficient management and use of resources. If any producer is temporarily able to set a price well above cost and to make a large profit because there is currently no competition, new firms will enter and compete, forcing the producer to lower the price. Firms find it profitable to compensate workers more when they work hard and efficiently, so individuals have an incentive to work hard and efficiently. Producers can profit by developing new products or better-quality products. Consumers benefit from these competitive pressures on producers and workers. Economists go further and show that the free market will usually generate just the right quantity—the socially optimal quantity—for consumers of each good or service. When economists say that the free market usually results in efficiency, they mean that the market not only pressures producers to minimize the cost of producing any product of a given quality—this is called productive efficiency—but also that it usually allocates the optimal quantity of resources to the production of good X versus good Y, which is called allocative efficiency. But what is the “right” quantity of good X for consumers? The production of each unit of good X uses resources (labor, materials, etc.) that could have been used to produce other goods like good Y. If consumers value the next unit of good X more than its cost, then it is best for consumers if the next unit of X is produced. But if consumers value the next unit of good X less than its cost, then it is best for consumers if the next unit of X is not produced and the resources are allocated to make a different good, Y or Z.