\# A Note to Professors This textbook can actually be covered in one semester. A semester has about 13 weeks and my book has 13 chapters averaging about 25 pages per chapter. My aim in writing this book was to present the most important public finance materials in a straightforward way to help both students and professors. Why not write a longer textbook and let each professor pick and choose? The problem with a longer book is that there are always some essential materials in every chapter. If a textbook has seven tax chapters but there’s only time to cover three, it becomes difficult for a professor to assign the crucial material. To make sure students get all of the essentials, a professor must assign sections of all of the chapters. Splicing a long book chapter by chapter and page by page isn’t easy for either the professor or the students. I fully realize that many professors will want to teach some material that I’ve omitted. That’s great. By all means, supplement my book with any of your favorite classroom material (also, please send it to me so I can consider including it in my next edition). Some supplementary materials were also developed to help you out, including a test bank and PowerPoint presentations. My concise book gives you the time to add your favorite materials. My book can easily be adapted for use in both lower- and upper-level classes. This text is written so it can be used by a professor (like me) who teaches one class with principles of economics students and another class with intermediate economics students. Assign the entire text to both classes. Assign the indifference-curve appendixes to the intermediate economics class. Take your choice with your principles of economics class: If you want to use indifference-curve diagrams, assign some or all of the appendixes; if you don’t, skip the appendixes. I’ve written my text based on firsthand experience teaching and grading a wide variety of students. I’ve had the opportunity to learn what materials different students can and cannot handle. My classroom experience has guided my judgment on what level of difficulty to use, what is too hard and what is too easy, what is challenging yet teachable and how to teach it, and what to include and what not to include. The way I’ve written each section reflects the feedback I’ve received from undergraduates in my lower-level course and in my upper-level course. I sincerely hope that you’ll decide that this is the best one-semester Public Finance textbook available for you and your students. Larry Seidman University of Delaware