\# Public Finance # Case Study: The Clash of Two Distinguished Economists over Social Security Two of the most distinguished and influential public finance economists of the past few decades are Martin Feldstein of Harvard and Peter Diamond of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Each has been elected president of the American Economic Association. Each has written numerous important and influential journal articles on all aspects of public finance economics. Feldstein has been an adviser to Republican Presidents Reagan, Bush, and Bush, while Diamond has been an adviser to Democratic President Clinton. Both agree about the basic framework and principles of public finance economics. Both agree that Social Security should be reformed. However, they differ on their recommendations for Social Security reform, and their disparity is due primarily to differences in personal philosophy rather than differences in economic analysis. To understand why they give different recommendations, recall Table 5.3. Feldstein favors “each individual self-sufficient” and recommends that individual private accounts be introduced into Social Security. Diamond favors “collective workers support retirees” and recommends a combination of tax increases and benefit cuts. Each emphasizes different rows of Table 5.3. Feldstein emphasizes the first three rows: His approach yields the higher average rate of return, higher capital and output for the economy, and provides individual ownership and control. Diamond emphasizes the remaining rows: that action should be, and after a decade of debate, Congress has deadlocked and taken no action. Almost all experts agree with the two presidents that it would be a serious mistake to do nothing about Social Security. Looming on the horizon is the very serious “2040 problem.” Yet even knowledgeable experts disagree about what should be done; for two specific examples, see the box “The Clash of Two Distinguished Economists over Social Security.” This section describes the problems facing Social Security and presents the alternative options for treating these problems. # Treating the 2040 Problem According to the analysis of the Office of the Chief Actuary of the Social Security Administration, if payroll tax rates remain constant, benefits due under the current Social Security benefit formula will be fully paid until 2040 by supplementing payroll taxes with revenue from interest earned on U.S. bonds in the Social Security Trust Fund and, in the decade prior to 2040, by gradually selling the U.S. treasury bonds that were accumulated by the Trust Fund from the mid-1980s to 2030. The U.S. government bonds that have accumulated in the Social Security Trust Fund are backed by the