\# 34 Public Finance emissions, while mandating low-pollution technologies does not. In some cases, mea- sur- ing may be too costly or unfeasible. Naturally, economists recommend using pricing only if the cost of measuring is less than the benefit of pricing. The tax method has another problem: It can never guarantee that the pollution target will be met precisely. In response to a given tax per unit, polluters may emit too much or too little. If too much, the government can raise the tax; if too little, the government can lower it. However, the government may never hit it exactly right. On the other hand, the tax method ensures that abatement will not occur if it is very costly, because if the tax is $40, polluters will only abate if the cost of abatement is less than $40. While the permit method guarantees that the target will be achieved, it has other problems. With the permit method, very costly abatement may occur, because the per- mit price that results from supply and demand may turn out to be very high, and if the permit price turns out to be $200, then polluters will abate as long as the cost is less than $200. Moreover, there are also practical problems. Will the sale (auction) occur on a single day for the year? Permits must surely be tradable so that firms can buy and sell them as their production plans evolve. But how well will the permit market work? Will firms buy permits simply because they expect to sell the permits at a higher price or because they want to keep competitors from getting the permits they need to produce? Will there be any restriction on who can buy or sell permits? Will the permit price fluctuate erratically in response to speculation and psychology? The tax method has none of these problems. Thus far, neither the United States nor any other nation has relied heavily on pollu- tion prices to implement environmental policy. However, the cause of pollution prices has slowly begun to make progress. Some recent experiments with pollution prices in the form of tradable permits (which we discuss later in this chapter) give grounds for hope. Nevertheless, we must confess that governments still generally mandate specific production techniques for polluters, and we continue to achieve a given level of envi- ronmental quality with an unnecessarily large sacrifice in output. # Charging a Price versus Mandating or Subsidizing Clean Technologies Instead of charging polluters a price (through a tax or tradable permits), why not require (mandate) producers to use particular clean, low-polluting technologies or make partic- ular clean products? Or why not give a subsidy (through tax breaks or direct payments) to firms or consumers for adopting clean production technologies or clean products? For example, instead of taxing oil or gasoline according to the pollution generated, why not require auto manufacturers to produce cars with a particular gas mileage or require homes to have a particular insulation? A mandate for producers seems very direct, and its cost consequences are hidden; therefore, this approach is often popular with the public. Giving tax breaks or direct payments is surely more popular politically than charging a price. However, economists almost unanimously recommend charging polluters a price and generally oppose either mandates or subsidies to producers or consumers of clean technologies and products. Why? First, economists emphasize that charging polluters a price automatically stimu- lates the production and consumption of clean technologies and products. When the price of a polluting good rises, consumers not only have an incentive to buy less of the polluting good but also have an incentive to switch to clean alternative products; therefore, producers automatically have an incentive to produce clean products. Note that charging polluters a price leaves a completely level playing field among potential