\# 4 Public Finance means they would buy the 90th unit but not the 91st. So it must be the case that the MB of the 90th unit is slightly greater than $12, and the MB of the 91st unit is slightly less than $12. We say that the MB of the 90th unit is (approximately) $12—the height of the D curve. Now we can see why it would be best for consumers if more than 90 units of X were produced. Consider the 91st unit. The height of the supply curve is the marginal cost (MC), so the MC of the 91st unit is about $8. The height of the demand curve is the marginal benefit (MB) to the consumer of that unit, so the MB of the 91st unit is about $12. Since the consumer values the 91st unit more than it costs, it should be produced. The same is true of each additional unit until the 100th. Symmetrically, it would be best for consumers if fewer than 110 units of X were produced. Consider the 110th unit. Its MC is about $12, and its MB is about $8. Since the consumer values the 110th unit less than it costs, it should not be produced—it would be better if the resources were used elsewhere to make other goods. The same is true of each unit until the 100th. Thus, 100 units of good X is just the right quantity for consumers. This is exactly the quantity produced in a free market by competitive firms seeking profit. The market produces the quantity at the intersection of the D and S curves. The quantity that is best for consumers is the quantity at the intersection of the MB and MC curves. Since the height of the D curve equals MB and the height of the S curve equals MC, the free market produces the optimal quantity of good X. Of course, not every market is perfectly competitive, but many markets are competitive enough so that Figure 1.1 conveys the basic reason why the free market usually works well for consumers and tends to produce roughly the right quantity of most goods and services. It should be emphasized that this analysis assumes that the marginal cost paid by each producer equals the entire marginal cost to society—the marginal social cost (MSC)—and the marginal benefit to each consumer equals the entire marginal benefit to society—the marginal social benefit (MSB). # TAXES, SUBSIDIES, REGULATIONS, AND INEFFICIENCY Whenever the free market generates just the right quantity for consumers, any government intervention that changes the quantity causes an inefficiency (“deadweight loss”)—a reduction in society’s welfare. Note that by “inefficiency” in this context economists mean an allocative inefficiency: the government intervention causes too many or too few resources to be allocated to the production of good X relative to other goods and services; if the free market produces the quantity of good X that is best for consumers, then a government intervention that changes the quantity is not best for consumers. A tax imposed by the government causes a decrease in the quantity below the optimal quantity. Figure 1.2 shows the effect of a $4 per unit tax levied on producers. Figure 1.3 shows the effect of a $4 per unit tax levied on consumers. Let’s explain each. In Figure 1.2, a tax of $4 per unit levied on producers increases their MC by $4 because the producer has to send $4 to the government for each unit sold. This shifts up their supply curve $4 to S⬘, so the market moves to the intersection of S⬘ and D, decreasing the quantity from 100 to 90. Note that the consumer pays a price of $12 to the producer who sends $4 to the government and keeps $8.