\# Glossary # M **marginal social cost (MSC)** The entire marginal cost to society of producing another unit of a good. **marginal tax rate (MTR)** The ratio of the additional tax to additional income. **market failure** An allocation of resources by the market that is not socially optimal. **marriage bonus** When marriage lowers the income tax paid by two individuals. **marriage penalty** When marriage raises the income tax paid by two individuals. **means-tested** Programs that are targeted to assist only low-income people. **median voter** The voter in the middle when voters are ranked in order of their preference. **Medicaid** Government health insurance for low-income people. **Medicare** Government health insurance for the elderly. **moral hazard** The use of more medical care by insured people because they know that their insurer will pay part or all of the bill. # N **negative externality** When a producer or consumer does not have to pay for a cost he generates. **negative income tax (NIT)** A program that would deliver cash benefits to low-income households. The benefit would be maximum when income is zero and would be phased down as income increases. **nominal interest rate** The interest rate actually paid. **nonexcludability** When it is not possible to exclude any person from benefiting from a good or service even if the person won’t pay for it. **nonrivalry** When consumption of a good or service by one person does not prevent consumption of the good by other people. **normal unemployment balanced budget rule (NUBAR)** A rule saying that Congress must enact a planned budget for the coming fiscal year that technicians estimate would be balanced if next year the unemployment rate is normal (the average of the preceding decade). **normative economics** Makes value judgments about whether something in economics is good or bad. # O **Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI)** The official name for the Social Security program. **open-ended categorical matching grant** A categorical matching grant without a ceiling (limit). **opportunity cost** A project’s opportunity cost is the benefit that could have been enjoyed by using the resources to instead produce other goods and services. **optimal federalism** The particular assignment of programs and taxes to particular levels of government that best promotes the well being of the citizenry. # P **pay-as-you-go (PAYGO)** Using current payroll taxes to pay current retirees’ benefits (as Social Security does). **payroll tax ceiling** The maximum amount of wages to which the Social Security payroll tax rate may be applied. **personal exemptions** A fixed amount per household member that is subtracted from adjusted gross income. **Pigouvian tax** A tax levied by the government to eliminate the inefficiency that occurs when there is a negative externality and the market produces too much of a particular good. Also called a corrective tax. **play-or-pay** Health insurance plan where employers must either “play”—provide health insurance—or “pay” a tax that would help finance government efforts to cover the uninsured. **political economy** The analysis of how government should and actually does make decisions concerning goods and services. **positive economics** Explains what happens in economics without saying whether it is good or bad.