\# Chapter 10 State and Local Public Finance # The Mechanics of the Property Tax Under the property tax, the local government assigns an assessed value to each residential and business property, and the property owner annually pays a tax equal to a flat percentage of the property’s assessed value. How is each property assigned an assessed value? In theory the assessed value should equal the property’s market value and should therefore be adjusted annually. In practice it is difficult to know the market value of a property that has not been sold for a long time. The best the tax agency can do is to make an estimate based on the prices of similar properties that have been sold recently. Thus, even when the local tax agency tries to assign an assessed value equal to the property’s market value, there is bound to be a substantial divergence because of lack of information. In many localities, moreover, the tax agency does not even try to make the assessed value equal to the market value. One reason is that market values generally rise in an economy that has some inflation, but properties are not reassessed very often. Another reason is that assessed values may sometimes be purposely set below market values in order to make property owners feel that they are getting a good deal from the local government. For example, if a property owner estimates that the property has a market value of $200,000 but the local tax agency assigns it an assessed value of only $100,000, the property owner may feel that she is getting a good deal and may therefore be less likely to complain of unfair treatment. Of course, what really matters is the combination of the tax rate and the assessed value. If a local government generally assigns assessed values that are only half of market values—so that the assessment ratio (the ratio of assessed value to market value) is 50% on average in the locality—but it offsets this 50% assessment ratio by doubling the tax rate, then property owners pay just as much. Property owners should look at both the assessed value and the tax rate assigned by the local government, not just the assessed value, to decide whether they are getting a good or bad deal. In fact, property owners usually don’t complain about their assessed value, which is often below market value; instead they complain about the property tax rate and the resulting tax. # The Distribution of a Residential Property Tax across Households Assume initially that all homeowners in a locality are middle age. Suppose that, as we move from low- to high-income homeowners, property value rises at the same rate as income (so if H earns twice as much income as L, then H has twice as much property as L). Then the property tax would be proportional to income. Suppose instead that property value rises faster than income (so if H earns twice as much income as L, then H has more than twice as much property as L); then the property tax would be progressive with respect to income (H would pay more than twice as much tax as L). Conversely suppose that property value rises slower than income (so if H earns twice as much income as L, then H has less than twice as much property as L); then the property tax would be regressive with respect to income (H would pay less than twice as much tax as L). It is important to recognize, however, that homeowners differ in age—they are in different stages of the life cycle. Consider the following typical life cycle: A young homeowner borrows to buy a home that has a property value that is high relative to the young worker’s current income. As the worker advances to middle age, the worker’s