\# Public Finance # FIGURE 5.2 # Social Security’s Benefit Formula Congress has set a progressive benefit formula: 90%, 32%, 15%.

|                                |      | 15%    | $1,785 |
| ------------------------------ | ---- | ------ | ------ |
|                                |      | 32%    | $640   |
| Primary insurance amount (PIA) |      | 90%    |        |
| 0                              | $711 | $4,288 |        |

that favors low earners more than high earners. The benefit bracket percentages are shown in Figure 5.2. The bend points where the percentages change are $711 and $4,288 in 2008. The benefit bracket percentages set by Congress are 90%, 32%, and 15%. In 2008 for the first $711 of AIME, the PIA increased 90 cents for each dollar of AIME, so an AIME of $711 yielded a PIA of $640. For the next $3,577 of AIME, the PIA increased 32 cents for each additional dollar of AIME, so a person with an AIME of $4,288 ($711 + $3,577) had a PIA of $1,785 (because \[.90 × $711] + \[.32 × $3,577] = $640 + $1,145 = $1,785). Above this AIME of $4,288, the PIA increased 15 cents for each additional dollar of AIME. Recall that, as explained above, the AIME of high earners is limited by counting wage income only up to the taxable ceiling, so the PIA is similarly limited (even without cutting the bracket rate from 15% to 0%). In 2008, a person who retired at 62 and who had worked steadily since age 22 with earnings always above the taxable ceiling had an AIME of $7,260 and a PIA of $2,230; because the person is retiring at 62 instead of waiting until his full benefits age (FBA) of 67, his monthly benefit would be 75% of his PIA, or $1,673, or about $20,076 for the year. Hence, due to the progressive benefit formula, the replacement rate falls as wage income rises. Applying the rates 90%, 32%, and 15% to AIME in order to get PIA, it turns out that: The replacement rate is roughly 60% for a low-income worker, 40% for an average worker, and 20% for a high-income worker. It should be noted, however, that on average low-income workers do not live as long as high-income workers; hence, even though low-income workers receive a higher replacement rate in retirement, they receive it for fewer years on average. # Social Security Benefits Social Security will provide benefits for a spouse who did not work in the marketplace or pay any payroll tax; he will receive a benefit equal to half of his spouse’s, and if