\# Chapter 13 Government Borrowing

!Government Borrowing

FIGURE 13.1 Government Borrowing

When the government borrows, the demand for loanable funds shifts to the right, raising the interest rate. Interest rate D′ D F0 F1 Loanable funds F # Government Borrowing, Interest Rates, and the Crowding Out of Investment Suppose the government either cuts taxes on households or raises cash transfers to households and increases its borrowing—its demand for loanable funds—to finance its deficit. As shown in Figure 13.1, the demand curve for loanable funds shifts to the right. If households mainly consume, not save, their tax cut or transfers increase, then the supply curve of loanable funds (which comes from savings) hardly shifts right (Figure 13.1 shows no shift), and at the initial interest r₀, the demand for funds will exceed supply, causing the interest rate to be bid up to r₁. This rise in the interest rate causes business firms to reduce their borrowing and investment. Thus, government borrowing “crowds out” private investment, thereby reducing tomorrow’s private capital stock and output per worker (i.e., productivity) in the private sector. For a further discussion of Figure 13.1, see the box “The Deficit and Interest Rates: An Estimate from U.S. Data.” # BALANCED BUDGET # Disciplining Politicians with a Balanced Budget Rule Suppose government is required to adhere to a balanced budget rule: Spending must be financed entirely by tax revenue. Such a rule would impose desirable discipline on politicians. Why? The public naturally likes the benefits they receive from government spending programs. If the public believes that such benefits can be obtained “for free,” they will naturally demand an excessive amount of such spending, and politicians will naturally vote to provide it. Whenever the price of a private or public good appears to be zero, consumers will demand too much of it. By contrast, the optimal rather than an excessive amount of a private or public good results when consumers see that they must pay the cost of any benefit. For a private good, this is done by charging the consumer a price equal to its cost. For a public good, it is done by charging the citizen a tax equal to its cost. If citizens see that they must pay taxes to finance government spending programs, they will weigh cost against benefit and vote for politicians who do the same.