\# Glossary # efficiency loss The reduction in society’s welfare caused by the unfavorable change in the mix of goods in response to a tax or subsidy when there is no externality. Also called inefficiency, deadweight loss, welfare loss, or welfare cost. # efficient A situation where it would be impossible to make a change that makes everyone better off. # elastic A demand or supply curve is elastic when a price change causes a large response in quantity (this happens when the curve is flat rather than steep). # elasticity A measure of the percentage change in one variable resulting from a one percent change in another variable. # elasticity of demand The ratio of the percentage increase in quantity demanded over the percentage decrease in the price. # elasticity of labor supply The ratio of the percentage increase in hours supplied over the percentage increase in the wage. # equimarginal principle The total cost incurred to achieve a pollution target has been minimized only if each polluter reduces pollution until its marginal abatement cost is the same as every other polluter. # excess burden The reduction in society’s welfare caused by the unfavorable change in the mix of goods in response to a tax. Also called the deadweight loss, welfare loss, or welfare cost of a tax. # excise taxes Taxes on particular commodities such as gasoline, alcohol, and tobacco. # exclusion A source of income that is not subject to the income tax. # expected value The average or mean value. # externality When a producer or consumer does not have to pay for a cost he generates (negative externality), or does not receive a payment for a benefit he generates (positive externality). # federal debt The amount of money that the federal government owes to lenders (bond holders). # federal deficit The difference between federal spending and tax revenue in a given year. # Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) The act that authorizes the financing of Social Security and Medicare through a payroll tax where half the tax is levied on the worker and half on the employer. # federalism The assignment of some government spending programs and taxes to the federal government, others to state governments, and others to local governments. # fee for service (FFS) A type of health insurance where health care providers receive a fee for each service. # fiscal capacity The ability of a community to finance public services. # fiscal imbalance The present value of future scheduled benefits minus the present value of future assigned taxes. # flat tax A tax composed of a value-added tax on firms except that wage income is deductible and a wage income tax on households above an exemption at the same (single) rate used for the value-added tax. # flypaper effect The tendency of a conditional block grant to increase spending on the specified activity more than an unconditional block grant even in cases where theoretically these two grants should have the same effect on the activity. The money “sticks where it hits.” # foreign tax credit A corporate income tax credit for taxes paid to foreign governments. # forgone earnings The wage income a person could have earned if she were not attending school. # free market The voluntary interaction of producers and consumers of goods and services. # free riders People who choose to let others pay for a public good and then enjoy the benefits that they did not pay for. # free-rider problem If there are too many free riders, reliance on voluntary contributions will result in an underprovision of a public good. # full benefits age (FBA) The age at which a person can begin collecting full monthly Social Security benefits. # generational accounting How particular generations or age cohorts fare with respect to government taxes and spending.