\# 214 Public Finance # Should a Deduction or Credit Have a Ceiling or a Floor? Consider the example of encouraging or rewarding contributions to charities (spending on X, where X is a charity). Under the current U.S. income tax, if a household chooses to itemize deductions, then all of its contributions to charity are deductible—there is no ceiling or floor. If the household is in a 35% tax bracket, then for every $100 contribution, its tax would be reduced by $35. It would be possible for Congress to put a limit (ceiling) on the amount that would be deductible. For example, if Congress set a ceiling of $10,000, then contributions in excess of the ceiling would not result in any further tax reduction. One advantage of a ceiling is that it limits the loss in tax revenue to the government. Another advantage is that it prevents any household from obtaining a deduction that some would consider “too large.” The disadvantage of a ceiling is that it removes the price incentive at the margin for the household to make additional contributions. Consider a household in a 35% bracket whose taxable income would still be in the 35% bracket if it gave $10,000 to charity. Suppose that if the U.S. income tax did not have a charitable deduction (or credit) provision, this household would give $10,000 to charity. Suppose Congress now enacts a charitable deduction, but with a $10,000 limit. The household recognizes that its $10,000 contribution would reduce its tax $3,500, but contributions above $10,000 would not reduce its tax. Thus, it is doubtful that Congress’ enactment of the deduction with a $10,000 limit would cause the household to raise its contribution much above $10,000. It is true that the deduction raises the income of the household $3,500, and this income effect may cause the household to raise its charitable contributions a bit above $10,000, but there is no price incentive at the margin. By contrast, consider the actual U.S. charitable deduction which has no limit. The household recognizes that for each $100 it gives, its tax is reduced $35, so at the margin it always has a price incentive of 35% to give more—any $100 contribution costs the household only $65 (because its tax is reduced $35). This price incentive is likely to result in a larger increase in the household’s contribution above $10,000. There is a way for Congress to lose less tax revenue but retain a price incentive at the margin. Instead of a ceiling, Congress could enact a floor. For example, suppose there would be no tax deduction for the first $10,000 contributed, but above $10,000 additional contributions would be deductible without limit. Then the government would lose no tax revenue on the first $10,000 the household contributes. But the household would recognize that once it has given $10,000, each additional $100 contribution would reduce its tax $35. The floor could be set as a percentage of income (either total income or AGI); for example, charitable contributions in excess of 4% of the household’s income might be deductible. Ideally, the floor for each household should be set at the amount the household would have given had there been no deduction, but a percentage of income should come closer to this ideal than a same dollar amount for high- and low-income households. Thus, a floor rather than a ceiling seems an attractive design, but it also has a disadvantage. The government cannot know for certain how much each household would have given without the deduction. Suppose the floor is mistakenly set too high; for example, set at 4% of income when the household would only have given 2% of income. Then the household would not raise its contribution above 2% of income. # Particular Deductions, Exemptions, and Credits Let’s consider several important itemized deductions, exemptions, and credits under the U.S. income tax.