\# Chapter 5 Social Security have today in a bank account to be able to provide the same benefit in retirement. So we can either take the future value of the bank account or take the present value of the social security benefits. Economists generally prefer to take the present value of the benefits as the measure of a worker’s social security wealth, which can be compared to the private wealth currently in the worker’s bank account plus the value of the worker’s bonds, stocks, and home. For most low-income workers, their social security wealth is almost their entire wealth—they have accumulated little private wealth (in a bank account, bonds, or stocks or in a home). By contrast, for most high-income workers, their social security wealth is less than half their entire wealth because they have accumulated substantial private wealth. In a series of empirical studies, one economist, Martin Feldstein of Harvard, has estimated that Social Security has cut U.S. private saving roughly in half, causing a large reduction in the capital stock of the economy. As with most empirical studies, there are various assumptions, techniques, and data that can be questioned, and a few other researchers have instead found that the effect of social security wealth on reducing private wealth and the capital stock is substantially smaller. Although the magnitude of the effect is in dispute, it seems highly likely that most middle-aged workers would save more if there were no Social Security program. # The Impact on Retirement In the United States, more workers start retirement at age 62 than at any other age. The percentage of working people who retire at age 62 is roughly 25%, while the percentage of people who retire at either age 61 or 63 is roughly 10%. It seems likely that this spike in retirement at age 62 is due to the fact that Social Security’s earliest eligibility age (EEA) is 62. The second most popular age to start retirement is the full benefits age (FBA). In the United States, there is another spike in the number of people who retire at the FBA, 65; many people consider this to be Social Security’s “normal” retirement age. In the United States, for each year a person delays starting Social Security benefits, the starting benefit is increased enough to compensate a worker with an average lifetime for the late start; of course, a person with a shorter-than-average lifetime will be less than fully compensated, while a person with a longer lifetime will be more than fully compensated. It seems likely that the numerical values that Congress chooses for Social Security’s EEA and FBA have an important impact on the age workers choose to retire. International evidence strongly supports the link between Social Security and retirement; similar spikes are generally observed in other countries. In France and the Netherlands, social security’s EEA is 60, and there is no increase in the starting benefit if a worker delays retiring beyond age 60; not surprisingly, the percentage of workers retiring in each country has a huge spike at age 60. In the early 1970s Germany reduced its social security EEA by five years, and during the next decade the average age at which German workers retired also fell by about five years. # REFORMING SOCIAL SECURITY The debate over reforming Social Security has been intense during the past decade. Both President Clinton, a Democrat, and President George W. Bush, a Republican, warned the nation that substantial legislative action must be taken by Congress to protect Social Security for the next generation. The two presidents disagreed about what