\# Public Finance # Appendix # Education In this chapter, the following statement was made: “Zero tuition drastically tilts the playing field between public and private schools.” Consider a parent choosing between a zero-tuition public school and a high-tuition private school. Even if the quality of the public school is lower than the private school, the parent may choose the public school because of the huge gap in tuition. Figure 11A.1 explains this statement using an indifference-curve/budget-line diagram (review the appendix to Chapter 1, which introduces the indifference-curve/budget-line diagram). Suppose the parents’ income is $50,000 and each unit of education quality has a price of $1,000. The parents’ budget line is AC. Without public schools, the parents would select a private school with quality V—10 units of education quality—and therefore spend $10,000 on their child’s tuition and $40,000 on other goods. Now suppose the parents have the option of a public school with zero tuition that offers 9 units of education quality, so that the parents have the option of choosing point B—9 units of education quality from the free public school and $50,000 of other goods. The parents still have the option of choosing a private school with tuition—the parents can still choose point V on AC. As the diagram shows, it is quite possible that point B is on a higher indifference curve than point V. If so, then providing a public school with zero tuition will cause the parents to reduce the quality of education they choose for their child from 10 to 9 units. In effect, the parents reason: “The public school has somewhat lower quality than the private school with $10,000 tuition that we would otherwise have chosen, but zero tuition saves us so much money that we’ll settle for the somewhat lower quality of the public school.” # FIGURE 11A.1 The Tuition Gap

|                            | $50,000 | A  | B  |
| -------------------------- | ------- | -- | -- |
| $40,000                    | •V      |    |    |
| Expenditure on other goods | 9       | 10 | •C |
| Education quality          | 50      |    |    |
