\# 60 Public Finance allowed on the plane—so there is a large private sector that provides air travel. Consequently, private firms are already producing a large number of planes for the private sector. Competition among these firms has improved their efficiency. It therefore makes sense for the government to take advantage of this efficiency by purchasing planes from these firms rather than producing its own planes. By contrast, why does the federal government employ its own soldiers, and why does a city government employ its own police officers? Private firms produce the planes for the federal military and the cars for the city police department because these firms are already producing planes and cars for a huge private sector. It is true that private firms employ armed security guards that provide protection to private firms, but these private firms do not employ a huge number of heavily armed soldiers or police officers. Many citizens would probably be alarmed at the prospect of private firms possessing heavy firepower and manpower. Most citizens seem to take it for granted that sizable armed forces and police forces should be under the control of elected public officials. An interesting illustration of private versus public production has occurred during reconstruction efforts in Iraq. The U.S. military has been in charge of the reconstruction, but many reconstruction projects have been contracted out to private firms such as Kellogg, Brown, and Root, a subsidiary of the large firm Halliburton (before becoming U.S. vice president, Dick Cheney was the CEO of Halliburton). Such contracting may make sense. There is a large private sector involved in construction projects throughout the world, so several large private firms have developed expertise in implementing such projects. Provided that the contracting process involves competitive bidding among a sufficient number of independent private firms and that contracts are awarded on objective merits, it seems sensible to generally use private firms rather than have the U.S. military perform the construction projects. Such projects require armed security to proceed safely in Iraq. Although the U.S. military attempts to provide general security in Iraq, security at particular reconstruction projects is usually provided by private firms. From time to time, armed private security forces, such as the firm Blackwater, have engaged insurgents trying to disrupt a project. There have been several incidents in which innocent Iraqis have been harmed by these private security forces. The behavior of these private armed security forces has been criticized by Iraqi citizens and by the government of Iraq. This has put the U.S. government in a difficult situation. The U.S. government has direct control over and responsibility for the behavior of U.S. soldiers in Iraq, but it does not have direct control over the behavior of armed private security forces of U.S. reconstruction firms. The private security firms and their employees operate outside the U.S. military’s chain of command, yet the U.S. military, and the U.S. government, is often blamed for the actions of employees of these firms. Critics have charged that private armed security forces should be prohibited and that all armed security should be provided by the U.S. military. Others reply that, except for a few incidents, private security forces have generally operated satisfactorily and reduced the burden on the U.S. military. Thus, it is not always clear who should produce a public good. The best practical approach should be decided case by case. # The Island Wall To appreciate the problems posed by a public good, imagine an island with three families. Suppose ships visit the island to sell private goods like food or clothing. The seller can easily exclude any family that refuses to pay, so there is no free-rider problem. As long as there is competition among visiting ships, the price of each item will be kept.