\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment The solution to excessive pollution is straightforward to most economists. Whenever pollution harms many citizens, usually the most practical solution is for the government to assume ownership on behalf of the public and then do what a typical private owner of a resource does: charge a price for its use. The market fails because a key element—ownership of a valuable resource—is absent. The solution is to restore the market by restoring the missing ingredient: ownership of the resource and a price for its use. # A Price for Pollution The government can charge a price in two ways: by a tax and by a permit price. Under the tax method, the government sets a tax per unit of pollutant X. Polluters are then free to respond; for each unit they pollute, they must pay the tax. Under the permit method, the government decides the aggregate quantity of pollutant X it is willing to tolerate. It then sells that quantity of permits to polluters, whereby each permit allows the owner to emit one unit of pollutant X. Emission of a unit of the pollutant without a corresponding permit would be illegal, triggering a steep fine or other penalties. The government would set the permit price in an auction to clear the market—the price at which the demand for permits by bidding firms equals the quantity the government has decided to supply. The permit method is also called cap and trade because a cap is set on the total quantity of pollution—the quantity of permits—and firms that initially obtain permits are allowed to trade them so there is an active secondary market in permits (just as there is in corporate stocks and bonds). Under the tax method, the government fixes the price per unit of pollutant X, but the response of polluters determines the aggregate quantity of pollution. Under the permit (cap and trade) method, the government fixes the aggregate quantity of pollutant X (sets the cap), but the bidding of polluters for permits determines the price of a permit—hence, the price per unit of pollutant X. Which method is better? It depends. We return to this question shortly. But note this: Both pricing methods raise comparable revenue for the government. Charging polluters a price forces them to internalize the externality. Previously, the harm they were causing the environment was external to them because they did not have to pay for it. By charging a price, the government makes the cost internal to the polluters—they must now pay for using up a valuable resource—the environment—just as they must pay for using up other valuable resources like labor and materials. Like any other internal (private) cost, they try to pass it on to buyers by raising the price of the product. This causes consumers to cut down on the purchase of the product and hence reduces pollution. # Coase’s Prescription When Victims Are Few: Assign a Property Right Before analyzing what to do when many citizens are harmed—the case that is relevant to major pollutants such as sulfur dioxide (acid rain) and gaseous carbon products (global warming)—it is interesting to consider what to do when only a few victims are involved. Several decades ago, the economist Ronald Coase pointed out that the government need not charge a price. Instead, the government can simply establish a standard private property right which makes the owner legally entitled to receive payment for any use of her property. With that property right in place, the potential polluter would end up confronting a price equal to the damage caused to the environment, and she would be optimally deterred from polluting. Coase gave an example where a rancher’s cattle eat the crop of a neighboring farmer. The government can simply establish that the victim—the farmer—has a property right.