\# 142 Public Finance # Efficiency If There Is a Positive Externality As we also explained in Chapter 1, a price subsidy may increase efficiency if there is a positive externality; in that case, it is a “corrective” subsidy. Suppose other people care about whether a patient gets a unit of medical care. Other people may care due to self-interest—for example, if a person gets a flu shot, she won’t spread the flu to other people. Other people may also care simply due to compassion—they feel better when sick people get help, even sick people they don’t personally know. For example, consider the last unit produced with the 75% subsidy (the 110th) in Figure 6.2, where the patient’s MB is $50 and the MC is $200. Suppose other people care about the sick person and would be willing to pay $150 to make sure the sick person gets that 110th unit. Then the marginal social benefit (MSB) of the 110th unit, as shown in Figure 6.2, would be $200, not $50; when the patient consumes the 110th unit, the patient benefits $50 (MB), and other people benefit $150. If this is so, then the MSB of the 110th unit would equal the MC. The socially optimal quantity is where the MSB curve intersects the MC curve, so the socially optimal quantity of medical care for sick people would be 110 units. This is exactly what patients would consume with 75% insurance. Thus, 75% insurance would be exactly what is needed to avoid any inefficiency and achieve the efficient quantity of medical care. # Optimal Redistribution from the Healthy to the Sick Insurance engineers a redistribution of resources and utility from the healthy to the sick. When the healthy help to buy medical care for the sick by paying X% of the cost, they have less left to spend on their own consumption, so their utility falls. Like any other redistribution of income, the donor’s utility falls and the recipient’s utility rises. Economics cannot declare a particular degree of redistribution to be optimal, deficient, or excessive. Economics and medical science can illuminate the trade-off between the well-being of the sick and the healthy and try to measure it in order to provide useful information to policy makers and citizens. Then policy makers and citizens, armed with this information, will have different preferences about how much redistribution from the healthy to the sick should occur. Citizens’ preferences concerning the redistribution of resources from the healthy to the sick may be complex. One citizen may prefer a large redistribution whenever the recipient is young and the prospect for full recovery is good, but a small redistribution when the recipient is old and frail and recovery is very doubtful. A citizen may prefer a large redistribution when the recipient has a painful disease that medical care can cure, but a small redistribution when the recipient has a painless disease that medical care is unlikely to cure. A citizen may support a large redistribution if she knows the sick person or receives a direct appeal for help from the sick person (an “identified” sick person), but the citizen may support a small redistribution if she doesn’t know the sick person and doesn’t receive a direct appeal for help from the sick person (an “unidentified” sick person). As medical care advances over time and becomes more effective, most people are likely to prefer a larger redistribution from healthy to sick. Suppose that medical care becomes so effective that even after a very large percentage of the income of the healthy (M% of GDP) has been redistributed to the sick, more medical care would still be beneficial to the sick. What if the benefit of medical care for the sick is only exhausted when most of the income of the healthy has been redistributed? A similar question could be asked of citizens of wealthy countries concerning redistribution of income to poor people in poor countries. How much redistribution would a citizen prefer? Once again citizens’ preferences will be complex, and