\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance # Government Insurance Government insurance would replace private insurance. Everyone would be covered by government insurance regardless of income, health, or employment. The federal government would pay most or all of each medical bill. This has been called a single-payer plan because the government, rather than many private insurance companies, would be the single payer of all medical bills. The private sector—business firms and households—would pay taxes to the government instead of premiums to private insurance companies. Although medical providers—doctors and hospitals—would remain in the private sector, the government—as the primary payer of medical bills—would have the power to exercise some control over prices charged, services supplied, technology used, and medical practices utilized. Congress would determine whether government regulation would be heavy or light, rigid or flexible, macro or micro. Earlier in this chapter we examined ways that private insurance companies, which now pay most of each medical bill, currently attempt to regulate medical care. Government would use many of the same techniques as it already does under Medicare and Medicaid. The government might pay each person’s entire medical bill, or it might require patient cost sharing. Patient cost sharing might be independent of a patient’s income; for example, the patient might have to pay 15% regardless of income until the patient’s burden reaches $4,000, after which the government pays the rest. Patient cost sharing could also vary with income; for example, a low-income patient might pay 5% until the burden reaches 2% of income, while a high-income patient might pay 25% until the burden reaches 4% of income, after which the government pays the rest. Government could use the previous year’s federal income tax returns to implement income-related patient cost sharing. # Arguments for Government Insurance

1. It would be a simple way to get everyone covered.
2. It would be a fairer system because everyone is covered regardless of income, health, or employment.
3. The government’s leverage as the primary payer of most medical bills would give it the ability to hold down prices and payments to providers.

\# Arguments Against Government Insurance

1. Taxes would have to increase substantially.
2. Government would overregulate medical providers, thereby impeding the introduction of new technologies, procedures, and medications.
3. Government would overrestrict supply, generating queues and excessive waiting times.
4. The majority of households are currently satisfied with their employer-provided private insurance, so such insurance should be retained, not replaced.

\# Medicare for Retirees As longevity increases and medical technology advances, the cost of Medicare for retirees is projected to increase dramatically. The Congressional Budget Office projects a rise in Medicare expenses over the next half century that is much larger than the rise in Social Security benefits; Social Security is projected to rise by 2% of GDP, but Medicare is projected to rise by 6% of GDP. Unless something is done to curtail the projected rise in Medicare costs, federal taxes will therefore have to be raised by about