\# Public Finance However, if workers, not employers, bear most of the cost, why do employers worry about rising health insurance premiums? The answer is that while workers bear the burden of a premium increase in the long run, employers bear it in the short run. If insurers raise their premiums by more than expected, employers usually still pay the wage increase that they promised; so in the short run, employers bear the burden of the unexpected premium hike. Gradually over time, employers respond to the unexpected premium rise by slowing the growth of cash wages below what it otherwise would have been. In conclusion, workers, whether they realize it or not, have a direct stake in slowing the growth in insurance premiums; the faster the rise in premiums, the slower the rise in workers’ cash wages and salaries. However, premiums must be raised if medical expenditures rise. So what determines the rate of growth of medical expenditures? # Rising Medical Expenditures Rising medical expenditures are due to the continuous upward shifting of both demand and supply curves for medical care. What causes a shift up of the demand curve? Suppose everyone had 100% insurance that paid the entire medical bill. As noted earlier, the medical market would “explode”: There would be no resistance by consumers to any rise in medical prices, and suppliers would be happy to continuously raise prices. Even short of this extreme case, the closer that insurance is to 100% and the more services that are covered, the greater should be the rise in the medical expenditures. Imagine a new medical technology that would improve quality but would also raise cost by $1,000 for treating a patient with a particular condition. If insurance paid 100%, all patients with this condition and their doctors would definitely demand the new technology, and it would be supplied and used. If insurance paid 80%, most patients and doctors, but not all, would demand it, so the rise in medical expenditures would be a bit less. Hence, the lower the percentage paid by insurance, the slower should be the rise in medical expenditures. So what determines the percentage paid by insurance? Most insurance is provided by employers, and employer-provided insurance is stimulated by the tax advantage noted earlier. Recall that all employer expenditures for health insurance premiums, in contrast to cash wages, are excluded from payroll taxes and from the personal income tax of employees. Note further that there is no limit on the amount of employer expenditure that is excluded. This is one reason that catastrophic insurance—despite its appeal in the earlier example—is uncommon and the percentage of medical bills paid by insurance companies is high. Suppose that there is a limit on the amount excluded; above that limit, there would be no tax advantage to giving additional compensation in the form of more insurance rather than cash wages. It seems likely that this would result in a smaller percentage of medical bills paid by insurance companies and hence a slower growth in medical expenditures. We return to this point when we consider public policy. What causes the supply curve to shift up? New technology, equipment, procedures, and medications are continuously being introduced into health care. While some of these innovations reduce cost, many raise cost while improving the quality and effectiveness of medical care. The height of the supply curve reflects cost, so cost-raising innovations shift up the supply curve. # THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT With this background on the principles of insurance and the features of health insurance markets, we turn to the role government might play in health insurance.