\# 216 Public Finance # ISSUES IN TAXING CAPITAL INCOME Let’s consider several interesting issues in taxing capital income. # Retirement Saving Incentives Under a comprehensive income tax there should be no tax deduction for saving, and capital income should be taxed in the year it is earned. The current U.S. income tax gives an incentive to saving for retirement. The incentive is given in one of two ways: Either a tax deduction is given for saving in the year it occurs, or capital income is exempt from tax as it is earned. A tax deduction is given when a household saves through a 401(k) plan at the workplace or in a regular individual retirement account (IRA). Note that a deduction for saving in a regular IRA is one of the adjustments made in going from total income to adjusted gross income (AGI) on the 1040 tax return. A tax exemption is given for capital income earned on saving in a Roth IRA. # Capital Gains On the one hand, the current U.S. income tax is easier on capital gains than a comprehensive income tax would be, because taxation is deferred until the stock is sold (i.e., until the gain is realized). Suppose the market value of your stock increases 10% this year from $10,000 to $11,000 and 10% next year from $11,000 to $12,100 when you sell it. Under a comprehensive income tax, you would be taxed this year on the $1,000 of unrealized capital gain and taxed next year on the $1,100; if the tax rate on capital gains is 15%, you would pay $150 this year and $165 next year. Under the current U.S. income tax, this year you would pay no tax, but next year you would be taxed on the two-year capital gain of $2,100, so you would pay $315. Although the total tax over the two years, $315, is the same, deferring this year’s $150 lets you earn interest on it. On the other hand, the current U.S. income tax is harder on capital gains than a comprehensive income tax would be, because it taxes nominal instead of real capital gains. Suppose the market value of your stock increases 10% this year from $10,000 to $11,000 when you sell it, but inflation this year is 10%. A comprehensive income tax would tax only a capital gain in excess of inflation, so you would pay no tax. The current U.S. income tax would tax you on your nominal capital gain of $1,000. Thus, whether the current U.S. income tax is easier or harder on capital gains than a comprehensive income tax would be depends on which effect dominates. # Business Income When you add up your income to obtain your total income, one of the items you must add is your business income. If you are a sole proprietor of a business, your profit is your business income; if you are a partner in a business, your share of the profit is your business income. Profit, in turn, equals sales revenue minus the costs incurred to generate the revenue. Thus, you deduct costs incurred in your business from your revenue to obtain your business income. What are your deductible business costs? Several are obvious. If you paid any employees, their compensation is a deductible cost. If you bought materials used up this year, that expense is deductible. If you borrowed money, the interest that you paid is deductible (note: the principal of the loan was excluded from taxable revenue so the repayment of the principal should not be a deductible cost). But suppose you bought a machine at the beginning of this year for $1,000 and you plan to use it for five years. Then a simple estimate of the cost of using the machine for the goods or services.