\# Public Finance $100 earned by each individual would be taxed at the lowest rate in the schedule, regardless of the income earned by the individual’s spouse. However, taxing individuals instead of households has a shortcoming. Given progressivity, two married couples with the same income would now pay different taxes: The household with income earned by one individual would pay more tax than the household with income earned by two individuals. Consider two couples each with $100,000 of income. In couple A, one spouse earns $100,000, the other earns $0. In couple B, each spouse earns $50,000. With household taxation, the two couples pay the same tax because income is the same. But with individual taxation and progressive rates, couple A pays more tax than couple B. Another concern is that, with individual taxation, household investment income and itemized deductions would need to be assigned to each spouse. If there were no rule preventing it, a high-earning spouse in a happy marriage (with no divorce on the horizon) might transfer the ownership of stocks, bonds, and bank accounts to the low-earning spouse, so that the investment income would be taxed at that spouse’s lower rate, while ownership of the house would remain with the high-earning spouse, so that spouse could take the mortgage interest and property tax deductions, thereby achieving a greater tax saving. To prevent this, Congress could adopt a rule assigning 50% of a household’s investment income and itemized deductions to each spouse. # A Labor Income Tax An income tax is levied on a household’s entire income—the sum of income from labor and income from capital. Let’s consider a proposal to exclude capital income (i.e., interest, dividends, capital gains) from the income tax and therefore tax only labor income. Note that the tax rate on labor income would have to be set higher than the income tax rate to raise the same revenue. For example, in the typical household, suppose that for every $100 of income, $80 is labor income and $20 is capital income. An income tax rate of 20% raises $20 of tax revenue. Then the labor income tax rate would have to be set at 25% to raise the same $20 of revenue (because 25% of $80 equals $20). What arguments can be given for excluding capital income from tax? First, it can be argued that a person shouldn’t be taxed more when she saves than when she consumes; but taxing capital income—income from saving—would do this. Second, excluding capital income probably induces the average household to save more. Third, a capital income tax causes an efficiency loss by reducing the return received by the saver below the return actually generated by the investment. Fourth, it can be argued that capital income has already been taxed at the business level through the corporate income tax or through other business taxes that we discuss in Chapter 9, so that the capital income a household receives is really after-tax income, and taxing it would be double taxation. What arguments can be given against excluding capital income from tax? First, it would strike many citizens as unfair to tax one kind of income but not another because both contribute equally to a household’s ability to consume. Suppose household K has $100,000 of capital income but no labor income, and household L has the reverse. They have the same ability to consume. Would it be fair to tax L but not K? Second, the exclusion may not increase saving. If a person has a target expenditure she wants to make in the future, the exclusion means that she doesn’t have to save as much to reach this target. Also, excluding capital income from tax requires raising the tax on labor income, so each person pays more tax during the work stage of life, which reduces the ability of a worker to save. Although the empirical evidence cited in Chapter 7 appears to contradict this, it is possible there are flaws in these studies. Third, the efficiency loss from a capital income tax may be small if the supply of saving.