\# Chapter 12 Low–Income Assistance by filing a federal income tax return. Spending on the Earned Income Tax Credit is nearly twice the spending on welfare. The U.S. welfare program for single mothers with children is called Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) in order to emphasize that aid to any family is temporary. The Welfare Reform Act of 1996 imposed time limits, work requirements, and certain conditions on young unwed mothers; and it converted the federal contribution from a matching grant to a fixed block grant. The Welfare Reform Act, a strong economy, and the expansion of the EITC together cut in half the number on welfare in the late 1990s. The official measure of poverty is based on a family’s pretax cash income and omits the impact of in-kind benefits, like Medicaid and Medicare, and of the Earned Income Tax Credit. If they were counted, in-kind government programs plus the EITC would significantly reduce the percentage of the population living below the poverty line (from 12% to 8%). A refundable tax credit is a policy instrument for providing low-income assistance. The EITC reaches low-income people because it is refundable. By contrast, tax deductions, tax exclusions, and ordinary tax credits do not help low-income people who pay little or no federal income tax. Refundable tax credits have been proposed for saving, education, health insurance, and home ownership. When a person is laid off from a job due to economic conditions facing her firm, she usually qualifies for unemployment insurance from the government and will be paid periodic cash benefits for up to 26 weeks; the benefit for the average worker is roughly 40% of her recent wage income (more than 40% for low-income workers, less than 40% for high-income workers).