\# 278 Public Finance To protect children from negligent parents and to protect others in society from the crime and welfare burden that would eventually result from uneducated children, government could require all parents to buy schooling for their children. This immediately raises the question: What about poor families who can’t afford even a low-tuition school? Government could provide financial aid to poor families to enable them to afford a low-tuition school. One way to do this would be to have poor families apply for aid by submitting information on family income and assets just as colleges do currently. Alternatively, the government could avoid requesting income and asset information by adopting a uniform voucher plan that gives every family with children the same dollar voucher per child—money that must be used for private school tuition. The voucher would be just large enough to enable even poor families to afford a low-tuition school. Any family would be free to add its own money to the voucher to buy higher quality from a school charging higher tuition. The voucher plan would require much more tax revenue than a financial aid program restricted to poor families. The government would try to prohibit private schools from discriminating in admissions on the basis of race, just as it tries to prohibit private firms from discriminating by race under the Civil Rights Act of 1964. There would be the usual problems of detecting discrimination and of whether and how to apply affirmative action, but experience with the Civil Rights Act indicates that such regulation should be able to reduce racial discrimination. With the uniform voucher plan just described, there would still be substantial variation in school quality across children according to family income. The government could reduce this variation by adopting a variable voucher plan. Low-income families would get a large voucher, middle-income families a middle-sized voucher, and high-income families a small voucher. To vary the voucher with family income, it could be implemented as a refundable tax credit on the annual personal income tax return. Even with a variable voucher plan, the problems of the admissions process would remain. Children would still be subject to entrance exams and rejections; there would still be no guarantee that neighborhood friends would be able to attend the same school; and children with special educational needs or problems would be charged high tuition to cover their high cost, or schools would avoid admitting them. It would be possible for the government to try to counter these problems with regulation, but this might prove difficult in practice. Although the theory behind vouchers has been debated by policy analysts, there have been only a few attempts to actually implement voucher plans in the United States. The voucher experiment that has probably received the most attention and generated the most controversy is the program that has been operating in Milwaukee since 1990. Low-income children are given vouchers that can be used to help pay private school tuition. The experiment has been passionately supported by voucher advocates and passionately resisted by voucher opponents. Analysts are divided on whether actual voucher experiments have been successful.1 # Public Schools An alternative approach for elementary and secondary education is in fact utilized in the United States and many other countries. School boards—elected by voters or 1 Caroline Hoxby, “Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?” American Economic Review 90, December 2000, pp. 1209–38; Jesse Rothstein, “Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers? A Comment on Hoxby (2000),” American Economic Review 97, no. 5 (December 2007), pp. 2026–37; Caroline Hoxby, “Competition among Public Schools: A Reply to Rothstein,” American Economic Review 97, no. 5 (December 2007), pp. 2038–55.