\# Chapter 13 Government Borrowing Suppose during the year that government spending equals taxes, so the nominal debt remains $100 billion. However, the real debt falls $9 billion (from $100 billion to $91 billion). Throughout this chapter, we have always said that if debt falls $9 billion this year, then there must have been a budget surplus of $9 billion this year; we’ve said that a surplus of $X causes debt to fall $X and a deficit of $X causes debt to rise $X. To preserve this relationship between the change in debt and the budget surplus or deficit, we define the real surplus and real deficit as follows:

| real surplus | taxes           | spending + reduction in real value of debt due to inflation |
| ------------ | --------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
|              | nominal surplus | + reduction in real value of debt due to inflation          |
| real deficit | spending        | taxes - reduction in real value of debt due to inflation    |
|              | nominal deficit | - reduction in real value of debt due to inflation          |

This year the nominal surplus is zero, but the real surplus is $9 billion; the real debt falls $9 billion (from $100 billion to $91 billion). Thus, the real surplus equals the nominal surplus (taxes minus spending) plus the reduction in the real value of the debt due to inflation. Suppose instead that spending exceeds taxes by $9 billion this year—the nominal deficit is $9 billion. The real deficit would be zero, because the nominal deficit of $9 billion would be offset by a $9 billion reduction in the real value of debt due to inflation. Think of this from the perspective of the government treasurer. Your financial position is strengthened by a nominal surplus, weakened by a nominal deficit, but strengthened by a reduction in the real value of the debt you owe bondholders due to inflation. To the government treasurer or any other debtor, inflation is good news because it reduces the real value of the debt that must be paid to bondholders. # Generating Inflation Although debtors have reason to like inflation, most debtors have no power to generate inflation. The federal government, however, does have the power. If the federal government spends more than it taxes not by borrowing but by printing money, then it injects a combined fiscal-monetary stimulus into the economy which raises aggregate demand for goods and services above supply and hence causes prices to rise—inflation. Thus, there is always a danger that if the federal government has gone deeply in debt, it may try to solve its debt problem by generating inflation which would “inflate away” the real value of its debt. Thus, excessive debt gives the federal government a motive to generate inflation—something it has the power to do. This is one reason why some analysts predict that a significant rise in federal debt as a percentage of GDP may eventually lead to inflation. Fortunately, a separation of powers has been instituted within the federal government to reduce the likelihood that it will generate inflation in order to solve its debt problem. Congress and the president have the power to set spending, taxes, and borrowing by authorizing the Treasury to sell bonds. But Congress and the president do not have the power to print money to pay for spending that exceeds taxes. The control over injecting money into the economy has by law been given to the Federal Reserve (the Fed), which is the central bank. Fed decisions about injecting money are made by its Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) consisting of the Fed chairman, the other six members of the board of governors, and the presidents of the 12 regional Federal Reserve banks. To inject money into the economy, the Fed buys government securities.