\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance A patient who worries that too much will be done might prefer an HMO, while a patient who worries that too little will be done might prefer FFS. There is no perfect solution to the principal-agent problem between patients and their doctors. Fortunately, there are at least three constraints on doctors to prevent them from deviating too much from what is best for patients. The first is ethics. Most doctors know it would be morally wrong to sacrifice the best interests of their patients for their own financial gain. The second is malpractice suits. Doctors know that patients may sue for medical malpractice. The third is reputation and long-run financial gain. If an FFS doctor develops a reputation of doing too much—for example, recommending surgery when it is unnecessary—eventually patients may avoid this doctor, hurting the doctor financially. Similarly, if an HMO develops a reputation of doing too little—for example, failing to recommend surgery when it is necessary—eventually patients may avoid this HMO, hurting its doctors financially. # Regulation by Insurers Thus far we’ve assumed that the insurer passively pays a fraction of whatever bill the patient incurs, but insurers have become active rather than passive. Because they are paying a large share of the bill, they have an incentive to try to limit their expenditures. They do this in a variety of ways. The insurance company may inform its enrollees and medical providers that there will be a set of restrictions and conditions. If there are relatively few large insurance companies, they may be able to exercise market power over both enrollees and providers. The insurers may try to regulate, influence, or “manage care” rather than simply letting fee-for-service providers and patients do whatever they want. First, the insurance company may pay only an “allowable charge” for each service (a charge the insurer will allow), even if the doctor or hospital charges a higher price. Either the patient will have to pay the difference in price, or the doctor or hospital will accept the allowable charge instead of the initial price. The insurance company may try to reach agreements with doctors and hospitals to accept the company’s allowable charge instead of the initial price and to refrain from billing the patient for the difference. The insurance company may develop a preferred provider organization (PPO) or network, a list of providers that have agreed to accept its allowable charges and refrain from additional billing of patients. Patients who “go outside the network” will have to bear the financial consequences. Second, the insurance company may refuse to pay for medical care that it judges to be unnecessary. It may decide that procedure B, which costs less than procedure A, should have been used for the patient, and it will therefore not pay for procedure A, or pay only its allowable charge for procedure B. For certain procedures, the insurance company may refuse to pay unless the procedure was certified in advance. It may refuse to pay for costly drug A when cheaper drug B is available. Of course, there are limits to the restrictions and conditions an insurer can impose. If an insurance company is too restrictive, potential enrollees might choose another insurance company, and doctors and hospitals might inform patients that they will not adhere to the conditions dictated by that insurer and advise patients to seek coverage from another insurance company. Nevertheless, if there are relatively few large insurance companies, they may succeed in imposing restrictions and conditions on enrollees and providers. # Employer-Provided Health Insurance Thus far we have assumed that insurance is sold to individuals or to individual families. In fact, most people obtain their insurance through their employer. Why?