\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance # Current Research # Should Some Medical Care Be Rationed? In their 2005 book, *Can We Say No? The Challenge of Rationing Health Care* (Brookings Institution Press), economist Henry Aaron of the Brookings Institution and physician William Schwartz contend that the United States will either have to deny some medical care to some people who would obtain some benefit from the care or to accept a significant slowdown in the improvement of our nonmedical standard of living. Their new book revises and updates their earlier 1984 book that examined rationing in the British health care system and contrasted it with the U.S. health care system. They begin their new book by writing, “The good news is that modern medicine works miracles. The bad news is that it breaks banks—public and private.” Beneficial but costly medical advances are likely to continue at a rapid pace, making it possible for us to spend an increasing share of our GDP on medical care that gives some medical benefit to more people, thereby leaving a decreasing share of our GDP for nonmedical goods and services. They contend that if we want to avoid this slowdown in the growth of nonmedical consumption, we must be willing to “limit the provision of care that is worth less than it costs to people who are well insured—that is, to ration care.” Aaron and Schwartz concede that rationing care is painful (their 1984 book called rationing “the painful prescription”) and that “the steps necessary to ration health care may prove more objectionable than the cost of paying for it.” They write that “health care can be rationed efficiently or inefficiently,” and argue that if there is to be rationing, it is important that it be done efficiently and equitably in a way that maximizes the overall benefits that can be achieved from a limited amount of resources. Aaron and Schwartz examine concrete examples of how particular kinds of medical care have been rationed under the British health care system and try to assess whether these same methods can or should be attempted in the United States. They conclude: “The choices are clear. We can simply pay the enormous bill for all beneficial medical care whatever the cost. Or we can ration. . . . Rationing will inevitably be controversial and difficult to implement, but like bitter but efficacious medicine, it can be good for our nation’s health.” This might be an acceptable solution for an extra year of life for a very old person. Assume for a moment that everyone earned the same income during the work stage of life and that everyone would die on her 100th birthday without the $1 million medical service. Assume each person’s income is high enough that anyone willing to save enough during the work stage of life would be able to accumulate an additional $1 million by age 100, which could be used to buy one more year of life. It would then be up to each person in the work stage of life to decide whether to save enough or not. Of course, some who arrive at their 100th birthday without having saved the extra $1 million will regret it. But the citizenry might respond: “You were told what would happen at age 100, and you made your choice—now you must accept the consequences.” Of course, people in the work stage of life earn very different incomes. Individuals differ in the exertion and luck they have in their career, in the health of their family, and in numerous other ways. Given these differences, most citizens would probably find it unacceptable to have an extra year of life provided only to persons willing and able to pay $1 million for it. At the same time, most citizens would probably judge that it was not worth raising taxes by the amount required to buy another year of life for every very old person. If we shift from this hypothetical option about an extra year of life to the actual numerous medical conditions and options that will face retirees, the basic problem remains: The citizenry is unlikely to be willing to pay enough taxes to finance the provision of every medical service that can provide retirees some medical benefit.