\# Public Finance capital income. Since both have the same total income, $60,000, it seems reasonable to conclude they have the same ability to pay tax, even though the sources of their income differ.³ Consider two other households. Suppose the first household plans to consume a lot (and save little), while the second plans to consume little (and save a lot). These plans do not seem to affect the household’s ability to pay tax this year. A household’s total income, therefore, seems like a better measure of its ability to pay tax than its labor income alone, its capital income alone, or its consumption. # Proportional, Progressive, Regressive One important feature of an income tax is how much more tax a high-income household than a low-income household owes. It is useful to apply these definitions—proportional, progressive, regressive—to an income tax schedule. The schedule describes how a household’s (tentative) tax varies with its taxable income. Suppose high-income household H has twice the taxable income of low-income household L. If the schedule says H must pay a tax that is twice as great as L, then the tax schedule is called proportional; if H’s tax is more than twice L’s, then the schedule is called progressive; and if H’s tax is less than twice L’s tax, then the schedule is called regressive. An equivalent way to say this follows: Looking across households in a given year, if the ratio of tax to taxable income stays constant as taxable income rises, the schedule is proportional; if the tax/income ratio rises, the schedule is progressive; and if the tax/income ratio falls, the schedule is regressive. It is evident from Table 8.4 that the U.S. income tax schedule is progressive. For example, as shown in Table 8.6, consider household L with taxable income $16,050, whose tax is $1,605 or 10% of taxable income; and household H, with twice as much taxable income, $32,100, whose tax equals $1,605 + 0.15($16,050) = $4,013, so H’s tax is 12.5% of taxable income. With the rising bracket rates shown in Table 8.4, tax as a percent of taxable income rises—hence, the schedule is progressive. Consider two simpler tax schedules. Under the first, every household must pay a tax equal to 10% of its entire taxable income. Clearly, this schedule is proportional—every household’s tax as a percentage of taxable income would be the same (10%). Under the second, every household must pay a tax equal to 20% of its taxable income above $20,000; hence, each household pays a 0% rate on the first $20,000 and a 20% rate on income above $20,000; so with rising rates (0% then 20%), the tax is progressive. As shown in Table 8.7, if L has taxable income of $25,000, it must pay 0.20($5,000) = $1,000, and if H has taxable income of $50,000 it must pay 0.20($30,000) = $6,000; so L’s tax is 4% of its taxable income, and H’s tax is 12% of its taxable income. Because H’s percent is greater than L’s, the tax schedule is progressive. According to a study by the Congressional Budget Office for the year 2001, the ratio of federal income tax to household income was 16.3% for the top 20% (i.e., the top 3

| Taxable Income | Tax     | Tax as a % of Taxable Income |
| -------------- | ------- | ---------------------------- |
| L              | $16,050 | 10.0%                        |
| H              | $32,100 | 12.5%                        |
