\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes its official estimate of future federal budget deficits—an announcement that would get headlines and embarrass Congress and the president. The CBO is required by Congress to make its official estimate of future federal budget deficits based on current law. According to current law, the AMT exemption and tax brackets are fixed dollar amounts, so the CBO has been required to estimate that the AMT will collect a huge amount of tax revenue in future years as household incomes rise. This official estimate of huge future AMT revenues has reduced the CBO’s official estimate of future budget deficits. The moment the AMT is indexed by law, the CBO’s official estimate of future AMT revenues will fall drastically, and its official estimate of future budget deficits will rise sharply. It is politically attractive for Congress and the president to compel the CBO to keep overestimating future AMT revenues and underestimating future budget deficits. Another option would be to terminate the AMT and replace the lost revenue by raising the top tax rates on labor and capital income—raising the tax rate on labor income and interest income above 35% and the top rate on capital gains and dividends above 15%. Terminating the AMT, of course, might permit some very affluent households to pay little or no income tax due to deductions, exemptions, and credits. However, it would obviously eliminate the AMT threat to the middle class, and raising the top tax rates would maintain the tax burden on most of the very affluent. # Different Tax Schedules for Married Couples and Single Persons Under the U.S. income tax, Congress has set a more severe tax schedule for singles than for married couples. Why did Congress set different schedules? Suppose that the tax schedule shown in Table 8.4 applied to singles as well as couples (it actually applies only to couples). Consider two single persons deciding whether to get married. Look back at Table 8.4 and suppose each person’s taxable income is $65,100 (the taxable income at the top of 15% tax bracket). Each dollar of their taxable income would be taxed either 10% or 15%, and no dollar would be taxed 25%. But if they married, $65,100 of their $130,200 would be taxed 25%. Marriage would push them into a higher tax bracket. Clearly, they would pay more total tax if they married than if they remained single. Congress has reduced the marriage penalty by setting a more severe tax schedule for singles. The initial tax rate is 10%, but it jumps to 15% sooner (at a lower income threshold) and then jumps to 25% sooner. With the two U.S. tax schedules, marriage can raise or lower the taxes of two individuals depending on their incomes; for some there is a marriage penalty, while for others there is a marriage bonus. Note that if the U.S. income tax had one tax rate (instead of progressive rates), there would be marriage neutrality for everyone: If every dollar of income were taxed at the same rate, then clearly two persons would always pay the same total tax whether they married or remained single. # CONCEPTS UNDERLYING THE INCOME TAX Having examined the basic facts, numbers, and mechanics of the income tax, let’s turn to the underlying concepts. # Ability to Pay A basic justification for the income tax is that it taxes households according to their ability to pay. Consider two households. The first has $40,000 of labor income and $20,000 of capital (investment) income; the second has $60,000 of labor income and no.