\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance

!Figure 6.2: Insurance and Efficiency

FIGURE 6.2 X% Insurance and Efficiency

|   | MSB  |    | MC   |     | MB  |   | F            |
| - | ---- | -- | ---- | --- | --- | - | ------------ |
|   | $200 |    | $150 |     | $50 |   | J            |
|   |      | MH |      | 110 |     |   | Medical care |

People could be given $150 of resources making them better off. As long as MB is less than MC, other people could be made better off while keeping the sick person’s utility the same by cutting another unit of medical care, giving the sick person her MB and giving other people MC – MB. By cutting medical care from 110 to MH (where MB intersects MC), the gain to other people (while keeping sick people’s utility constant) would be the area of the triangle FJH; the efficiency loss from not cutting medical care from 110 to MH equals the area of the triangle FJH. Now notice something important about Figure 6.2. The size of the triangle area—the efficiency loss—depends on how steep the MB curve is. If the MB curve is steep, then the area of the triangle—the efficiency loss—would be small. What would make the MB curve steep? Suppose sick people judge that cutting medical care even slightly below what they obtain with insurance would cause a sharp drop in their utility. Then they would need a large payment to compensate (to keep their utility constant) for even a slight reduction in their medical care, therefore their MB curve would be steep, and the efficiency loss from insurance would be small. Even if the efficiency loss from insurance were large, this does not mean that citizens should oppose insurance. Insurance redistributes resources and utility from the healthy to the sick. In theory, this redistribution could be accomplished without generating an efficiency loss by giving sick people cash income rather than a price subsidy. However, if the most practical way to redistribute resources is through an insurance price subsidy, then citizens should support the use of the insurance price subsidy if they judge that the social benefit from the redistribution outweighs the efficiency loss. In judging the best numerical magnitude for X%, citizens should balance the social benefit of redistribution against the efficiency loss. A technical point: The MB curve in Figure 6.2 is the compensated demand curve which shows how much the quantity demanded decreases when price increases, but income also increases enough to keep the person’s utility constant (despite the price increase which would have lowered utility). Because income also increases, the compensated demand curve—the MB curve through J—is steeper than the ordinary demand curve through J (which connects J and O in Figure 6.1), so the efficiency-loss triangle is smaller than the triangle that would be formed by the ordinary demand curve in Figure 6.1. This chapter’s appendix provides further analysis.