\# 288 Public Finance College, of course, has benefits. The first is the increase in rest-of-life earnings. A college degree will usually enable an individual to obtain a higher-paying job. The increase in earnings is shown in Figure 11.2 as the difference between the rest-of-life earnings curve with college and the earnings curve without college. To properly compare future benefits to present costs, recall from Chapter 4 that it is necessary to take the present value (PV) of the future benefits. For example, if 10 years after graduating, you will earn $10,000 more than you otherwise would have earned because you attended college, then the present value of $10,000 ten years in the future equals $10,000/(1 + r)10 where r is the interest rate; if the interest rate is 3%, then the PV of $10,000 ten years in the future equals $7,441. Next you should sum the PV of future earnings benefits in every year you will be working. If the PV of your future earnings benefits exceeds the cost (forgone earnings plus tuition) of your four years of college, then you gain financially by attending college.4 It’s too late for this calculation to help you decide whether to go to college, but it’s not too late to make this calculation to help you decide whether to go to graduate school. The second benefit is increased rest-of-life job satisfaction—college opens the door to jobs that wouldn’t be available with just a high school degree, and it should therefore raise job satisfaction. The third benefit is simply that being at a college campus for four years may be more satisfying and enjoyable than working. Do your best to put a dollar estimate on the second and third benefit. Then sum the three benefits. If the sum of all three benefits exceeds the cost of college, then you achieved a net benefit by going to college. Note that economists are well aware that college benefits go beyond higher future earnings—the first benefit—and we urge you to consider both financial and nonfinancial benefits when you decide whether to pursue higher education. # Private Colleges without Government Suppose government played no role in higher education. Private colleges would charge tuition to cover cost, and individuals attending college would pay full tuition. Would the outcome be socially optimal? College raises the productivity of an individual and therefore the output of the economy. However, this doesn’t mean that government should help pay private college tuition or operate a college that charges tuition that is lower than cost. It is economically efficient for an individual to attend college as long as the increase in rest-of-life productivity (plus nonmonetary benefits) exceeds the cost of college. Therefore, an individual will attend college without government help as long as the increase in rest-of-life earnings (plus nonmonetary benefits) exceeds the cost of college. As long as the increase in earnings equals the increase in productivity, individuals pursuing self-interest will do what is economically efficient; they will attend college when the increase in productivity (plus nonmonetary benefits) exceeds the cost of college and won’t attend when it doesn’t. In an economy with competitive labor markets where employers bid for labor, earnings tend to follow productivity. At first glance, it might seem there is no reason for government to help pay private college tuition or operate a public college charging a tuition that is less than cost. 4 We simplify by treating the four years of college as though it were a single year. Also, note that by computing the present value of your future benefits, you are taking into account the interest cost you incur if you borrow to help pay for college, so you shouldn’t add your interest cost to your cost of college. Even if your family has enough funds to avoid borrowing, your family could have earned interest (forgone interest) on those funds. So there is an interest cost to attending college even if you don’t borrow. Whether you borrow or not, your interest cost is taken into account when you compute the present value of your future benefits.