\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes

| TABLE 8.11          |   |    |    |    | Tax Rule   |   |    |    |    |   |
| ------------------- | - | -- | -- | -- | ---------- | - | -- | -- | -- | - |
| Taxation of Nominal | 1 | 0% | 4% | 4% | 25% tax on | i | 1% | 3% | 3% |   |
|                     | 2 | 8  | 12 | 4  | 25% tax on | i | 3  | 9  | 1  |   |
|                     | 3 | 8  | 12 | 4  | 25% tax on | i | p  | 1  | 11 | 3 |

In row 1, with no inflation (p 0%), the saver who puts $100 in the bank earns $4 interest (i $4/$100 4%), pays $1 tax (t $1/$100 1%), and has $103 to spend. At the end of the year the saver can buy 3% more goods than at the beginning of the year; the after-tax return is 3% (i t p 4% 1% 0% 3%). In row 2, with inflation 8% higher (p 8% instead of 0%), the nominal interest rate would be roughly 8% higher (i 12% instead of 4%), so a saver who puts $100 in the bank would earn $12 interest, pays $3 tax (t $3/$100 3%), and has $109 to spend. At the end of the year the saver can buy only 1% more goods than at the beginning of the year; the after-tax real (inflation-adjusted) return is only 1% (i t p 12% 3% 8% 1%). In row 3 there is also 8% inflation, but the 25% tax rate is applied to real, not nominal, interest income. The saver really shouldn’t have to pay tax on $12, because $8 of the $12 is needed just to keep up with 8% price inflation at the stores. Only $4 should be taxed. In the table, the tax should be 25% of (i p), not of i. If this were done, then the saver would pay $1 tax (t $1/$100 1%) and have $111 to spend, so the after-tax real return would be 3% (i t p 12% 1% 8% 3%), the same as in row 1. The current U.S. income tax gives the same treatment to capital gains. What should be taxed is real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) capital gains, not nominal capital gains. Only a rise in the value of stock in excess of what is needed to keep up with inflation should be taxed. The example for interest income in Table 8.11 is easily reinterpreted for capital gains. Suppose a household buys stock for $100 on January 1. On December 31, if inflation is 0%, it sells the stock for $104; if inflation is 8%, it sells the stock for $112. In either case it should be taxed only on $4—its real capital gain (in excess of inflation). But under the current U.S. income tax, it is taxed on nominal capital gains, $12. The impact on the after-tax real rate of return is exactly as shown in Table 8.11. With taxation of nominal capital gains in row 2, the after-tax real return would be only 1%, while with taxation of real capital gains in row 3, the after-tax real return would be 3%, the same as in row 1. Why doesn’t Congress change the U.S. income tax so that real capital income, not nominal capital income, is taxed? Most economists think that it should. However, economists point out that the adjustment for inflation should be made not only when a household receives interest but also when a household pays interest (for example, after it borrows to buy a house or car)—thus, only real (inflation-adjusted) mortgage interest payments, not nominal mortgage interest payments, should be given an itemized deduction. Congress is probably reluctant to reduce the amount borrowers can deduct because this would be unpopular. Maybe this is why Congress has chosen to ignore inflation when it comes to capital income. # Credits versus Deductions Suppose the aim is to encourage or reward a household for spending on category X. One way is to give a household a tax deduction for its spending on X. Suppose households H and L each spend $1,000 on X and therefore get a tax deduction of $1,000.