\# 166 Public Finance Utility lie on the same indifference curve. With insurance, the out-of-pocket price to the consumer is low, PL, and the person can afford to buy any point on the budget line AB (the slope of the budget line is equal to –PL). The person chooses the point on the budget line with the highest utility—the point that is tangent to an indifference curve. As drawn, the person chooses point J with quantity of medical care MJ. Figure 6A.1(b) shows the corresponding point J with price PL plotted on the vertical axis. With insurance, the price is PL and the person demands quantity MJ. In Figure 6A.1(a), if the price rises from PL to PH, the budget line would rotate down (clockwise) to AC, the person would move from point J to point I, and her utility would fall. In Figure 6A.1(b) the person would move up her ordinary demand curve Dₒ to point I. But suppose that as the price rises from PL to PH in Figure 6A.1(a), the person is given additional income so that she can stay on the indifference curve that goes through point J. The additional income moves the budget line out parallel to AC until it goes through point S. With this additional income accompanying the price increase, the person moves from J to S instead of to I. This move along the original utility curve is called the substitution effect of the price increase. In Figure 6A.1(b), the person moves up her compensated demand curve from J to S. Through point J in Figure 6A.1(b), the compensated demand curve is steeper than the ordinary demand curve. Note that as the person moves from point J to point I along the ordinary demand curve, utility falls; by contrast, as the person moves from J to S along the compensated demand curve, utility stays constant. Now recall how the MB curve in Figure 6.2 was constructed. The MB curve shows how many dollars the consumer would have to be given to keep her utility the same if she had to give up that unit of medical care. But utility stays constant along the compensated demand curve, not along the ordinary demand curve. So starting from point J with medical care MJ, whenever M is reduced a unit, it is the compensated demand curve in Figure 6A.1(b) that shows how many dollars the consumer must be given to keep her utility the same. The MB curve is the compensated demand curve, not the ordinary demand curve. Hence, the MB curve through point J is steeper than the ordinary demand curve through J. In Figure 6.2, the efficiency loss triangle is bounded by the MC curve and the MB curve—hence, by the MC curve and the compensated demand curve Dc. Thus, the area of the triangle bounded by the MC curve and ordinary demand curve Dₒ is greater than the efficiency loss from insurance—the efficiency loss equals the area of the smaller triangle bounded by the compensated demand curve Dc.