\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance optimal. Insurance provides the subsidy—the patient pays part of the medical bill but the insurer pays the rest. Helping people obtain private insurance or providing government insurance may therefore be socially optimal due to a positive externality. Economists who favor government intervention for health insurance differ over which kind of intervention would be best. One option is for the government to operate a health insurance program in which workers and employers pay enough payroll taxes each year so that government has the funds to pay a large percentage of all medical bills. The U.S. government operates such a program—Medicare—for the elderly, but not for working families. A second option would be for the government to help families obtain private health insurance by providing tax credits to individuals who obtain insurance through an employer or on their own. A third option would be for the government to provide last-resort insurance at an affordable premium for anyone unable to obtain private insurance at an affordable premium. Several other options for government intervention are also available. All this is discussed in Chapter 6. A final important point about social insurance should always be kept in mind: Social insurance is redistributive—it reduces inequality between low- and high-income households. Social insurance programs are financed by taxes that collect many more dollars from the typical high-income household than from the typical low-income household. But the dollars are spent more evenly. For example, Medicare spends roughly the same amount for hospital care for the average low-income patient as for the average high-income patient. # Income Distribution, Taxation, and Efficiency: # Chapters 7, 8, and 9 Although economists agree that the free market usually works well for consumers, they disagree about whether the distribution of income generated by the free market is fair. Economists agree that the tax system can be used to modify the after-tax distribution of income. Economists also agree that such modification would cause some efficiency loss to the economy. They disagree about how much efficiency would be lost, whether the resulting distribution of after-tax income would be fairer than the market distribution, and if so, whether the gain in fairness outweighs the loss in efficiency. # Income Distribution Most economists agree that the free market distribution of income tends to promote economic efficiency. The free market usually (though not always) distributes higher income to people who have higher economic productivity. Firms find it profitable to pay more to attract high-productivity workers, and the higher their actual productivity, the higher their pay. Consequently, individuals have an incentive to obtain the education and training needed to raise their productivity and to work hard on the job to increase their productivity. Firms find it profitable to give low pay or even zero pay (a dismissal) to workers whose low or poor effort makes their productivity low. Consequently, individuals have an incentive to work hard and efficiently in order to avoid low or zero pay. Investors have an incentive to channel funds into productive ventures that pay high returns. Inventors have an incentive to develop new products and processes that yield high profits and hence high remuneration. Entrepreneurs and investors have an incentive to take risks that may generate high earnings. Economists disagree, however, over whether pay that varies according to economic productivity is always fair. Most think it is fair to the degree that a person’s economic productivity reflects his own effort to acquire education and training and to work hard. An individual’s economic productivity may reflect economic aptitude as well as