\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance others a low percentage, thereby varying the out-of-pocket price faced by different individuals. The random assignment helped control for other factors, thereby isolating the impact of the price on the quantity demanded. The price elasticity varied according to the particular medical service, but for the average medical service: The study estimated a price elasticity of 0.2: a 50% reduction in the price a person faced raised the quantity the person demanded by 10%. The demand for medical care is inelastic—its price elasticity is less than 1.0—but it is not zero: What patients must pay does have some effect on how much medical service they demand. # Adverse Selection and Asymmetric Information When setting up your health insurance company, you must also be aware of adverse selection: Instead of a random sample selecting to enroll, a biased sample with higher medical cost is likely to enroll. Thus far we’ve assumed that no one knows, at the beginning of the year, whether his bill will end up $61,000 or $1,000, so that there is no bias in the mix of persons who decide to buy insurance. You charge them all the same premium because their health prospects look the same to you. However, suppose people have accurate “inside information” about their health prospects: Some people know they are likely to have a hospital episode, while others know they probably won’t. Because buying insurance is voluntary, there will be a bias in the mix of people who decide to buy your insurance. Instead of just 5% of your enrollees incurring a hospital episode, you’ll discover at the end of the year that a higher percentage go to the hospital. Therefore, if you think people know more about their hospital prospects than you do, you’d better charge a higher premium. Suppose you charge a higher premium in anticipation of a biased mix of enrollees. Your higher price is likely to make your mix of enrollees even more biased. At the higher price, some people who are confident that they won’t have a hospital episode will decide to take their chance and go without insurance; the people who keep enrolling despite your higher price will be the ones who, with inside information, know they are very likely to have a hospital episode. So at the end of the year, it may turn out that even your higher premium is not high enough to cover the medical bills of your enrollees. Next year you may feel that you have to charge an even higher price, which will cause even greater bias in who decides to enroll. It is even possible that this problem will be so severe that there is no premium that you can charge in order to make a profit. This problem was illustrated nicely in a 1970 article by Nobel prize–winning economist George Akerlof on the market for “lemons,” used cars that have hidden serious defects (a lemon’s nice appearance conceals its acid taste). The seller of the used car knows whether it’s a lemon, but the buyer doesn’t. Potential buyers suspect that if someone is offering to sell a used car at a reasonable price, it’s probably a lemon. Thus, potential buyers are cautious about purchasing any used car, so there is a market failure: Used cars without defects are not sold to buyers who would have been glad to pay a reasonable price if they were sure they weren’t lemons. The source of the problem is the asymmetry of information between the buyer and the seller. # Catastrophic Insurance Let’s return to the moral hazard problem—or, as economists say, the price responsiveness problem. To focus on this problem, assume that all persons have identical health prospects—everyone’s expected medical cost is the same. Also, assume there is no adverse selection problem (there is no inside information). If insurance pays the entire