\# Chapter 5 # Social Security worker retires. The employer must therefore estimate, under great uncertainty, how much to put away each year in order to meet this future obligation. The employer therefore risks not accumulating enough to pay promised benefits. Thus, increasingly, the private sector has moved toward defined-contribution plans. However, this means that the typical worker is now bearing an investment risk—his retirement benefits depend on his fund’s investment history, not his wage history. # The Implication for Social Security What is the implication for Social Security of this private sector shift away from defined-benefit and toward defined-contribution plans? Two opposite responses are possible. Under the first, it can be argued that the private sector shift reflects the preference of workers for defined-contribution plans, and Social Security should follow this trend by also switching from defined benefit to defined contribution. Each worker’s Social Security benefit would be whatever has actually accumulated for the worker; the benefit would no longer be linked to the worker’s wage history by a formula. At any time, each worker would be able to check the amount that has accumulated in his fund and plan accordingly. With each worker keeping track of his fund and receiving periodic statements (like bank statements) from the Social Security Administration, it is extremely doubtful that Congress would ever dare to interfere with a worker’s fund. By contrast, Congress has periodically changed Social Security’s defined-benefit formula. So defined-contribution Social Security would be less subject to political risk than defined-benefit Social Security. Under the second, it can be argued that it seems prudent to keep Social Security as primarily a defined-benefit plan. The main objection workers have to defined-benefit plans at private firms—that switching firms results in a forfeiting of benefits—is not relevant to Social Security because workers who switch firms remain under Social Security coverage. An arrangement that may appeal to workers would be coverage by a defined-contribution plan through their employer (or on their own) and coverage by a defined-benefit Social Security program. In this way, a typical worker’s retirement benefit would depend partly on the contributions to and investment history of his own defined-contribution fund and partly on his own wage history through Social Security’s defined-benefit program. Social Security’s defined-benefit plan has important advantages. A retiree’s benefit is based on his own wage history, not investment history—so while there is political risk of a change in the benefit formula, there is no investment (stock market) risk. The benefit is an annuity which pays a monthly benefit until the person dies. The benefit has an automatic full cost-of-living adjustment—if inflation rises during retirement, automatically so does the monthly Social Security benefit. It is not always possible for an individual to purchase a private annuity at a reasonable price that has a full cost-of-living adjustment because of adverse selection in the private annuity market. It can be argued that Social Security’s defined-benefit inflation-protected annuity is becoming more, not less, important as the private sector shifts from defined-benefit to defined-contribution pensions. Under Social Security’s progressive defined-benefit formula, moreover, there is some redistribution from high- to low-wage workers when they retire: If person H earned three times the wage and paid three times the payroll tax each year as person L, person H would receive a monthly benefit perhaps twice but not three times as great as person L because of the progressive benefit formula. For anyone who favors such partial redistribution, this is an important virtue of defined-benefit Social Security.