\# 10 Public Finance # FIGURE 1.9 Market Inefficiency When There Is a Positive Externality

|     | $14    |     | $4 |
| --- | ------ | --- | -- |
| $12 |        | $10 |    |
| A   |        |     |    |
|     |        | MSB |    |
|     | D (MB) |     | Q  |
| 100 |        | 110 |    |

What kind of government intervention is appropriate when there is an externality? We will see in Chapter 2, “Externalities and the Environment,” that when there is a negative externality, the government should levy a tax of proper magnitude to eliminate the inefficiency; such a tax is called a corrective tax. We will see in Chapter 6, “Health Insurance,” that when there is a positive externality, the government should provide a corrective subsidy of proper magnitude to eliminate the inefficiency. Note that when there is a negative externality, a tax of proper magnitude is a hero, not a villain, and when there is a positive externality, a subsidy of proper magnitude is a hero, not a villain. In Chapter 2 we examine policy to treat a particular negative externality—damage to the environment. In Chapter 6 we consider the possibility that medical care generates a positive externality—a benefit to other people when sick patients receive medical care—and we try to determine which policy would be appropriate to treat it. # Public Goods: Chapter 3 Suppose it is either difficult or undesirable to exclude somebody from benefiting from a service even if the person refuses to pay for it voluntarily. Consider military protection against an attack by a foreign country. If government played no role in national defense, would private business firms operating through a free market supply adequate protection against a foreign attack directly to any consumer willing to pay for it? Imagine a large private corporation that trains employees to be soldiers, purchases military equipment and weapons, and tries to sell protection against a foreign attack to individual consumers. Consumers would know that if the corporation provides protection to others against foreign attack, they will automatically be protected even if they refuse to pay. Each selfish consumer would therefore wait for others to buy protection from the corporation. This is called the free-rider problem. If most consumers are selfish and wait, a free market will produce too little military protection. If a company sells fire protection, it would be possible to exclude people who refuse to pay from being protected. However, when a fire breaks out in a home, many would regard it as undesirable to have a fire company let it burn because the homeowner has...