\# Public Finance # INCIDENCE: WHO BEARS THE BURDEN? People, Not Firms, Ultimately Bear All Tax Burdens A variety of taxes are levied on business firms—payroll taxes, corporate income taxes, and sales taxes. In response, firms may do some or all of the following: raise product prices, passing some burden onto consumers; reduce wages, passing some burden onto workers; reduce dividends, passing some burden onto stockholders; reduce executive compensation, passing some burden onto managers. Hence, people, in their role as consumers, workers, stockholders, and managers will ultimately bear the burden of taxes levied on business firms. The purpose of incidence analysis is to determine which people bear how much of the burden from particular taxes. In this chapter we use the supply-demand diagram to analyze the incidence of tax burdens and explain how the tax burden is divided between suppliers (sellers) and demanders (buyers). Two examples are a tax on gasoline and a payroll tax. For the gasoline tax, the suppliers are gas station firms and the demanders are drivers. When we show how much of the burden falls on the suppliers—business firms—it should be understood that these firms then pass the burden onto the workers, managers, and owners, who ultimately bear the burden. For the payroll tax, the suppliers of labor are the workers and the demanders are business firms. When we show how much of the burden falls on the demanders—the firms—it should be understood that the firms then pass the burden onto consumers, managers, and owners, who ultimately bear the burden. # The Distribution of the Burden Depends on the Relative Elasticities # A Tax on Gasoline Figure 7.1(a) shows the effect of a tax on gasoline in a competitive market governed by demand and supply. Price is set in the competitive market, and given the market price, each firm decides how many gallons to supply and each driver decides how many gallons to demand. Hence, firms and drivers are “price takers.” The lower the price, the greater the quantity demanded by the buyers (drivers). The higher the price, the greater the quantity supplied by the sellers (gas station operators). The market will go to the intersection point: In the absence of a tax, the price would be $3.50 per gallon. The height of the supply curve equals the marginal cost (MC). Suppliers (sellers) compare the cost that they will actually have to pay to supply another unit—their marginal cost—to the price they will get for it. As long as their MC is less than the price, they will make more profit by supplying another unit. For example, when the price is $3.50 a gallon, station operators keep supplying gasoline as long as the MC is less than $3.50; the cost of supplying the last unit must be just under $3.50. Consider the effect of a $1.00 per gallon tax. Assume the tax is levied on the station operators—they are legally required to make the payment to the government; the drivers are not required to pay.1 The effect of a $1.00 tax per gallon would be to shift up the supply curve by $1.00, because the tax would increase the marginal cost that the station operators have to pay by $1.00. The market would therefore move to the intersection of the D curve with the new S curve, so the amount of gasoline bought and sold would fall. As drawn in Figure 7.1(a), the price paid by the drivers would rise from $3.50 to... 1Under U.S. tax law the check must be written by the first entity to refine, distribute, or wholesale gasoline; in this chapter we simplify by assuming that the supplier who writes the check is the station operator.