\# Chapter 9 Consumption Taxes the flat tax or X tax would be computed, some citizens have been puzzled or troubled by the fact that at the household level the flat tax or X tax would tax wage income but not capital income. # A HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION TAX It would be possible to replace the household income tax with a household consumption tax: On the annual 1040 tax return, the household would report its consumption instead of its income and pay tax on its consumption instead of its income. Alternatively, it would be possible to supplement the household income tax with a progressive consumption tax on very high consumption; on the annual 1040 tax return, a very affluent household would report its consumption as well as its income and pay tax on its consumption above a very high exemption as well as on its income. The household would arrive at its consumption in the past calendar year by subtraction: It would sum its cash inflows and then subtract nonconsumption cash outflows—all saving would therefore be tax deductible in the year it occurs. This subtraction would yield the amount of cash that must have been used for consumption; this amount would be subject to tax at the rates in the tax table. Like the household income tax, the household consumption tax could have graduated (progressive) rates.3 If the household consumption tax is intended to replace the income tax and raise roughly the same revenue from each income class (so that the replacement is revenue neutral and the consumption tax has the same progressivity as the income tax it replaces), then the consumption tax rates must be more graduated than the income tax rates. This is because as we move from low- to high-income households, the ratio of consumption to income falls (the affluent save a greater percentage of their income). The rates would also have to be higher than income tax rates to raise the same revenue, because the tax base, consumption, is smaller than income (saving is tax deductible). Thus, to raise the same revenue from the affluent, the top rate would have to be set higher than the current top income tax rate of 35%. # History of a Household Consumption Tax The case for converting the household income tax to a household consumption tax was presented a half century ago in two books by two distinguished economists: Irving Fisher of Yale University and Nicholas Kaldor of Cambridge University; it was developed further in the U.S. Treasury’s Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform in the mid-1970s. The past three decades have witnessed numerous articles and several books describing and analyzing a household consumption tax (also called a consumed income tax or expenditure tax). In 1995 a bill to convert the household income tax to a household consumption tax was introduced in the U.S. Senate; its sponsors were Senator Domenici, a Republican, and Senator Nunn, a Democrat, and the bill was called the Unlimited Savings Allowance (USA) Tax. Making saving tax deductible is not a radical departure because, as we saw in Chapter 8, saving in certain retirement accounts is already tax deductible under the current income tax. The difference is that under a household consumption tax, all saving—whether for retirement or not—would be tax deductible. 3 If Congress did not want the consumption tax to be progressive, it would be simpler to enact a retail sales tax or value-added tax.