\# Chapter 11 Education property of another family, its MB is twice as high. Then a property tax would induce the families to unanimously support the socially optimal quality. However, if each family’s MB is not proportional to its property, then a property tax would not induce a unanimous vote in favor of the socially optimal quality. Consider a town where a family’s property usually varies directly with age, so an old family (O) usually has more property than a young family (Y). A young family has school-age children, while an old family does not, so the young family’s MB is higher than the old family’s (as shown in Figure 11.1, family Y’s MB is twice as high as family O’s MB). A property tax would impose a higher tax price on the old family (the family with the lower MB) than on the young family (the family with the higher MB). Consequently, the young family would prefer more than 10 units of quality, while the old family would prefer less than 10 units. With a property tax financing the public school, most young families would vote for high quality, while most old families would vote for low quality. # State Funding of Public Schools The residential separation process results in high-income towns, middle-income towns, and a large low-income “town” (the inner city). If public schools were financed solely from local taxes, then high-income towns would have higher-quality public schools. For example, suppose schools are financed entirely by a local property tax, and the ratio of the total property value in the town (the property tax base) to the number of pupils in high-income town H is twice as great as in low-income town L. Then if both towns levy the same property tax rate, property tax revenue raised per pupil will be twice as great in H as in L. With spending per pupil twice as great in H as in L, school quality will be higher. Thus, school districts differ in their fiscal capacity—their property tax base per pupil. Hence, two districts that set the same tax rate will raise different amounts of revenue per pupil. Some citizens believe that all children should have equal educational opportunity regardless of the income or property wealth in their school district. This goal has been called income neutrality, or wealth neutrality. Several court decisions have held that a state must act to reduce the disparity in spending per pupil among its school districts because a significant disparity violates either the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution or a similar provision of a state’s constitution (e.g., the Serrano v. Priest decision in California in the 1970s). If citizens want to reduce the disparity in school quality between towns H and L, they can use the state government as a vehicle to redistribute funds from high-income towns to low-income inner cities. The state can levy taxes on households and/or business firms throughout the state, thereby extracting revenue from affluent suburban (and urban) households and from corporations and other business firms. The state tax revenue can then be distributed to local public school districts by a formula that favors low-income districts. We consider three approaches: a foundation plan, a district power equalizing plan, and a variable matching grant plan. # A Foundation Plan A foundation plan gives each district a grant per pupil that provides a basic minimum foundation upon which the district can add its own spending. The purpose is to make sure that every district can achieve a basic minimum expenditure per pupil. The grant per pupil is usually phased down as the wealth of the district increases. A shortcoming of the foundation plan is that it doesn’t provide a financial incentive for a district to increase its own effort or spending.