\# Public Finance One sector where this has often occurred is public schools. New teachers are given a relatively short trial period when they are subject to discharge for poor performance. After this period, they receive tenure and can no longer be discharged for mediocre or poor teaching; thereafter, their pay is usually determined by seniority. Some teachers defend tenure as a protection of “academic freedom” that enables them to hold and express views that are unpopular with the elected officials on their school board or their administrators. Some teachers defend pay by seniority rather than performance as a further protection of their academic freedom. Some teachers say they object to pay by performance, not in theory but in practice. They point out the difficulty of measuring performance and fear that if a defective measure is used, it will distort teaching and actually harm students. For example, if students’ scores on a particular standardized test are used to judge teacher performance, then teachers may spend excessive time preparing their students for this test. Teachers also worry that their performance will be judged simplistically and unfairly. They argue that what they do is much harder to judge than the production of most goods and services. There are many other sectors of the economy where it is also hard to measure a worker’s performance. Despite the difficulty, employers and supervisors make decisions about whom to promote and how much more to pay worker A than worker B. These decisions are often guided by intangible subjective judgments rather than by objective numerical measures. Obviously some judgments are incorrect and unfair, but most economists believe that throughout the economy pay for performance generally works better than pay strictly by seniority. It follows that one priority for improving public schools might be to give less weight to seniority and more to performance and to restore the ability of administrators to discharge slacking or poor-quality teachers. Teachers judged as excellent would be paid high salaries regardless of their seniority. Wide pay differentials between outstanding and mediocre teachers would attract talented individuals to become teachers. Local citizens who favor pay for performance would need to vote for school board members who promise to implement it. Of course local school boards might meet resistance from some teachers and teachers’ unions or associations. The resistance will be harder to overcome if local teachers can correctly claim that other districts are staying with seniority. Thus there is an argument for a state to provide matching grants to school districts as a reward for tightening the link between teacher pay and performance. # Holding Schools Accountable for Results With the signing into law of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act by President George W. Bush in 2002, the federal government joined state governments in attempting to hold local public schools accountable for results by using standardized tests. NCLB requires states to devise and annually administer standardized tests to all students from grades three to eight. The state must keep track of each school’s standardized test scores. Schools with students who fail to make adequate progress must permit those students to transfer to other public schools, pay for tutoring for low-income students, and replace some teachers and/or change curriculum; schools with extreme failure may even be shut down. According to one study, testing and school penalties implemented by states in the 1990s appear to have improved student achievement. ³ Eric Hanushek and Margaret Raymond, “Does School Accountability Lead to Improved Student Performance?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24, no. 2, pp. 297–327.