\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment Therefore, whether the price is charged through the tax or permit method, the desirable pattern of cutback across polluters is induced. A price system results in the socially optimal allocation of pollutant X across polluters. There is a more general principle at work here. A price system results in the socially optimal allocation of any resource across users—whether the resource is labor, capital, materials, or pollutants. This is why economists want to use prices to allocate pollution among polluters. We can disagree over what the target for pollutant X should be. Should it be 800 units or 1,200 units instead of 1,000? But once the target has been set, we can surely agree on this: Let’s achieve the pollution target with the minimum sacrifice in output. That is exactly what pollution prices can do. Pollution prices induce a socially desirable pattern of pollution reduction across polluters. This means that the target is achieved with the minimum loss in the value of output. # Objections to Pollution Prices and Economists’ Responses When discussing pollution prices, one major question arises: Isn’t a pollution price a “license to pollute” and therefore ethically questionable? This objection confuses two distinct questions: First, what should be the aggregate target? Second, given the target, how should we allocate the pollution among polluters? Prices apply only to the second issue, while the objection is really concerned with the first issue—the setting of the target. Let the case be made for a zero target. If it is persuasive, then we should simply ban the pollutant. However, if it is not persuasive and we decide to tolerate a certain quantity of pollutant X, then we should achieve the target with the minimum sacrifice in output. That is where prices come in. Won’t the polluters just pass on these pollution prices to “innocent” consumers by raising product prices to cover these charges? Yes, they certainly will. The purpose of pollution prices is to confront consumers with the environmental cost of the products they buy. The price system is an information system. The price of each good is supposed to convey information to the consumer—namely, the cost of producing it. If the price is less than cost, then the consumer is misled and demands too much of the good; if the price is greater than cost, then the consumer demands too little of the good. The free market fails because the price of “polluting output” (output that generates pollution in its production or use) is too low relative to the price of “pollution-free output” (output that generates no pollution in its production or use). Why is the price of polluting output too low? Because it doesn’t include the environmental cost. Why doesn’t it include the environmental costs? For the simple reason that polluters are not charged for polluting. Why aren’t they charged? Because there is no owner of air or water to impose the charge. Consumers are induced by the false price signals to consume too much polluting output and too little pollution-free output. The whole point of pollution prices is to raise the price of polluting output relative to the price of pollution-free output so that consumers receive accurate information and, as a result, shift consumption from polluting goods to pollution-free goods and services. But won’t pollution taxes raise the tax burden on the population? No, because the government should return the pollution revenue to the population by cutting other taxes or sending people cash transfers. Pollution taxes are revenue replacers, not revenue raisers. # Practical Problems to Pollution Pricing Let’s consider a few practical problems with the two pricing methods. Perhaps the most important practical problem is this: Pricing requires measuring each polluter’s