\# 302 Public Finance $75 for each $100 the household earns. If its income is $4,000, the benefit is reduced by $3,000 to $3,000. So this NIT imposes a marginal tax rate of 75%.³ # The EITC versus a Wage Subsidy Under a wage subsidy, the government would pay a worker an hourly benefit that depends on the hourly wage. The hourly benefit would equal a percentage of the gap between the wage and a target wage. For example, the wage subsidy might give an hourly benefit equal to 75% of the gap between the wage and $10; if the wage were $6, the hourly benefit would be $3. An advantage of the wage subsidy over the EITC is that benefits would only be paid to low-wage workers. Under the EITC, it is possible for someone who earns a high wage to receive a benefit because she works few hours and therefore has low wage income; the EITC is based on wage income, not the hourly wage. But the EITC has two advantages over the wage subsidy. First, the EITC pays benefits only to low-income households. Under the wage subsidy, low-wage workers from high-income households would receive benefits. Second, under the wage subsidy, it may be easy for some workers to understate their hourly wage in order to obtain larger benefits. Currently employers are required by the government to report the wage income but not the hourly wage paid to each employee. Thus a government auditor can easily cross-check the wage income that a worker reports against the wage income paid by her employer when she claims the EITC; no communication with the employer would be necessary. Currently an auditor cannot easily cross-check the hourly wage a worker reports to claim the wage subsidy; presumably the employer has a record of each employee’s hours worked and wage per hour, but the auditor would need a communication with the employer to obtain that information. # The EITC versus the Minimum Wage When the government enacts a minimum wage law, any worker previously paid less than the minimum wage who retains her job enjoys an increase in wage income. However, it is likely that some employers will lay off some workers rather than raise a low wage up to the minimum wage; obviously any worker who does not retain her job suffers a decrease in wage income. In the future, some jobs that would have been offered at a wage below the minimum wage won’t be offered. An advantage of the minimum wage over the EITC is that there is no budgetary cost to the government. An advantage of the EITC over the minimum wage is that it raises the income of low-income households while increasing, rather than decreasing, employment. # Reform of the EITC The EITC has some problems that might be reduced by making a few changes. Consider three possible changes in the EITC:

1. Reduce the phase-out rate to further encourage work.
2. Further raise the EITC of a married couple relative to single parents to reduce the marriage penalty that the EITC sometimes (but not always) imposes.
3. Give a higher EITC for a third child to further reduce poverty.

Let’s consider each change in turn. ³ According to the first way of describing the NIT, the benefit is B = t(Y\* – Y), where Y\* equals target income and Y is the household’s income. Multiplying yields B = tY\* – tY, which is the second way of describing the NIT: The household with zero income (Y = 0) receives a benefit of tY\*, but each dollar of Y reduces the benefit tY.