\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance # FIGURE 1.8 Market Inefficiency When There Is a Negative Externality

|    | $14 |        |   |   | $12 |   | $10 |
| -- | --- | ------ | - | - | --- | - | --- |
|    |     | A      |   |   |     |   |     |
|    |     | D (MB) |   |   |     |   |     |
| 90 |     |        |   |   |     |   | 100 |
|    |     |        |   |   |     |   | Q   |

Starting at 100, the quantity under the free market, for each unit less there would be a net gain to society equal to the vertical distance MSC-MB; no further net gains would be possible once MSC equals MB. Adding the vertical distances MSC-MB, unit by unit, yields the area of the triangle BAD. The area of the BAD triangle equals the inefficiency generated by the free market when there is a negative externality. In this example, the inefficiency is $20 because ½ (base ⫻ height) ⫽ ½ ($4 ⫻ 10). Now suppose that the consumption of a good—for example, medical care (M)—benefits not only the people who consume it but also people who don’t consume it. This could happen for a number of reasons. When a person receives medical treatment for a contagious disease or is vaccinated to prevent it in the first place, other people benefit because they are less likely to catch it. Also, some healthy people feel better whenever sick people have the medical care they need, either because they care about sick people or because they think that they will get similar treatment if they become sick. For example, suppose the consumption of each unit of M causes $4 of benefit to other people. The marginal social benefit (MSB) is defined as the regular MB to the consumer plus the marginal benefit to other people. As shown in Figure 1.9, the MSB curve is $4 higher than the D curve. The socially optimal quantity occurs at the intersection of the MSB curve and the MC curve—110 units of good M. Consider the 100th unit. The consumer is willing to pay $10 for the 100th unit, and other people are willing to pay $4 for the same unit, so the MSB is $14; however, the cost of the 100th unit is only $10. So it would be best if the 100th unit were produced—and the same for the units from the 101st to the 110th. The market goes to where D and S intersect, 100 units, so the market generates too little of a good when the consumption of the good involves a benefit to other people—a positive externality. The free market generates too little of any good that has a positive externality. Starting at 100, the quantity under the free market, for each unit more there would be a net gain to society equal to the vertical distance MSB-MC; no further net gains would be possible once MSB equals MC. Adding the vertical distances MSB-MC, unit by unit, yields the area of the triangle BAD. The area of the BAD triangle equals the inefficiency generated by the free market when there is a positive externality. In this example, the inefficiency is $20 because ½ (base ⫻ height) ⫽ ½ ($4 ⫻ 10).