\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance # FIGURE 1.1 Supply and Demand The market goes to the intersection.

|   | $12    | $10 | $8  |     |
| - | ------ | --- | --- | --- |
|   | D (MB) |     |     |     |
|   | Q      | 90  | 100 | 110 |

Figure 1.1 shows the market supply-demand diagram for good X. The market price is $10, and the quantity bought and sold is 100. The price is set in the competitive market, and given the price, each buyer decides the quantity he wants to demand, and each seller decides the quantity he wants to supply; hence, buyers and sellers are price takers. At a price of $10, the buyers want to buy 100 (demand D is 100) and the suppliers want to supply 100 (supply S is 100). If the price is initially $8, demand would exceed supply so that the price would get bid up to $10. If the price is initially $12, supply would exceed demand and competition would drive the price down to $10. Note that in the supply-demand diagrams in this book, supply and demand curves are drawn as straight lines, but the term curve will generally be used because the actual relationship between price and quantity may be curved rather than straight. Thus far our discussion of Figure 1.1 illustrates positive economics—an explanation of what happens without saying whether it is good or bad. Now comes a key question in normative economics, which does try to say whether it is good or bad: In Figure 1.1 is 100—the quantity at the intersection of curves S and D—the right quantity of good X for consumers? The answer is usually yes. To see why, we must first establish that the height of the supply curve is the marginal cost (MC) of producing that unit and the height of the demand curve is the marginal benefit (MB) to a consumer of that unit. Why is the height of the S curve the marginal cost (MC)—the cost of producing the next unit? Producers find it profitable to increase production of X another unit as long as the MC is less than the price P, and they find that it is profitable to stop when MC is about to rise above P. If the price is $8, the S curve says that producers would supply 90—this means they would find it profitable to produce the 90th unit but not the 91st. So it must be the case that the MC of the 90th unit is slightly less than $8, and the MC of the 91st unit is slightly greater than $8. We say that the MC of the 90th unit is (approximately) $8—the height of the S curve. Why is the height of the D curve the MB? Consumers buy another unit of X as long as its marginal benefit (MB)—the maximum dollar amount they would be willing to pay for it—exceeds its price P. If the price is $12, consumers would demand 90—this