\# 40 Public Finance the S curve will shift up parallel by the amount of the tax and the new S⬘ curve will intersect the D curve at the socially optimal quantity so the market will move to that quantity. Thus: If MD varies with quantity, the proper tax equals the MD at the quantity where the MSC and MB curves intersect. # Use Pollution Tax Revenue to Cut Other Taxes The purpose of pollution taxes is not to raise revenue—it’s to discourage pollution. So when pollution taxes are levied, other taxes can be cut or direct cash transfers can be sent to households or firms (in Chapter 8 on the U.S. income tax, we will see that a cash transfer can be implemented by a refundable tax credit). If the federal government levies the pollution tax and collects the revenue, other federal taxes can be cut, such as the federal income tax. If a state government collects the pollution tax revenue, other state taxes can be cut, such as the state sales tax. If a local government collects the pollution tax revenue, other local taxes can be cut, such as the local property tax. Alternatively, whichever government collects the pollution tax revenue can return the revenue by sending cash transfers to households. Different ways of returning the pollution tax revenue to the private sector will have different effects. If household income tax rates are cut, then revenue will be returned to households according to how much income tax they pay. If sales (or value-added) taxes are cut, prices of consumer goods will be lower so even low-income people who pay no income tax will benefit; thus, cutting sales (or value-added) taxes is an equitable way to offset the burden of pollution taxes. If an equal-dollar cash transfer (refundable tax credit) is given to all households, then all households will receive the same dollar boost in income. The crucial point is that pollution taxes should be viewed as revenue replacers, not revenue raisers. They are levied to reduce pollution, not to raise government revenue. However, if all the revenue is returned to the population, does this mean that pollution taxes impose no burden? No. Pollution taxes cause less of certain goods—namely goods that involve pollution. The reduction in these goods imposes a burden on society (in Figure 2.4, HIK). On the other hand, the improved environmental quality is a benefit (in Figure 2.4, HIJK). As long as the benefit is larger than the burden, the pollution taxes are socially desirable. # Tax Emissions, Not the Polluting Good Let’s return to the gasoline example and consider another important point. Different kinds of gasoline generate different quantities of pollution per gallon. Given this fact, should the government vary the tax per gallon according to the quantity of pollution? The answer is yes. By varying the tax according to the pollution per gallon, producers of gasoline are given an incentive to produce (and consumers of gasoline, an incentive to use) the kind of gasoline that involves less pollution. In other words, there should be the same tax per unit of pollution, not per gallon of gasoline. The government should tax emissions (pollution), not the polluting good. Consider another example where it is very important to levy the tax on emissions, not on the polluting good: Sulfur dioxide generated in the production of electricity. When the generation of electricity involves burning coal containing sulfur, sulfur dioxide is produced. If sulfur dioxide is emitted into the air, acid rain is produced with harmful effects, according to scientists. However, it would be a mistake to levy