\# Chapter 5 Social Security If his spouse dies, he receives her full benefit. If a spouse works in the marketplace, he receives whichever is larger: a benefit based on his own wage history or half of his spouse’s benefit. Social Security also provides benefits to workers who become seriously disabled and unable to work. Disability benefits are roughly 15% of total Social Security benefits. A worker must be screened, evaluated, and wait nearly a half year before receiving benefits. The benefit is comparable to what the person would have received if he had worked until 65. If a person waits until the full benefits age to start Social Security, then he receives the full PIA, but if the person starts at an earlier age, he receives less than the PIA. The monthly benefit is reduced if one retires earlier—for example, a person with an age of full benefits of 65 who starts retirement at 62 (the earliest age permitted) receives a monthly benefit equal to 80% of his PIA. If he waits until after 65 to start retirement, he receives a monthly benefit greater than his PIA. For many years, the FBA was 65, but Congress has enacted a schedule that gradually raises the FBA to 67. For people born before 1938, the FBA is 65; for people born between 1943 and 1954, it is 66; and for people born after 1959, it is 67. A person with a full benefits age of 67 who starts collecting benefits at 62 receives a monthly benefit equal to 75% of his PIA. Between ages 62 and 64, Social Security has an earnings test: For each dollar earned above a threshold (roughly $12,000), the monthly benefit is reduced by 50 cents. This is really not a tax, just a postponement, because once the person’s wage income falls below the threshold or once the person reaches 65, he will get it back with interest. The earnings test used to apply to people 65 and over, but Congress has recently exempted them. # Figure 5.3 shows the sources and uses of Social Security revenue. In 2007, 84% of its revenue came from payroll taxes, 14% from interest on its bonds, and 2% from income tax levied on benefits; 73% of its revenue went to pay benefits, 25% to increase its holdings of U.S. Treasury bonds, 1% to administer Social Security, and 1% for an exchange with another government fund.

| Sources and Uses of Social Security Revenue |                                          |
| ------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| Sources:                                    | Uses:                                    |
| Payroll taxes 84%                           | Benefits 73%                             |
| Interest 14%                                | Increase in U.S. bonds 25%               |
| Taxation of benefits 2%                     | Administration 1%                        |
|                                             | Exchange with another government fund 1% |
| Sources: $744.9 billion                     |                                          |
| Uses: $744.9 billion                        |                                          |

Source: 2007 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds, table II.B1.