\# 170 Public Finance In Figure 7.1(a), the demand curve is steep and the supply curve is flat. Suppose instead that the demand curve is flat and the supply curve steep as shown in Figure 7.1(b). Then, as drawn, the $1.00 tax would cause the price paid by drivers to rise only $0.20 from $3.50 to $3.70, and the price kept by station operators after paying the tax would fall $0.80 from $3.50 to $2.70. The burden would be split 20/80 between demanders (drivers) and the suppliers (station operators). Note that the quantity would fall from 100 gallons to QT, and that QT may be greater, equal to, or less than 90, depending on how steep the supply curve is and how flat the demand curve is \[hence, no number is given for QT in Figure 7.1(b)]. For this section we have the following definition: If a curve is flat, we say it is elastic because when the price changes, there is a large response in the quantity. If a curve is steep, we say it is inelastic because when the price changes, there is a small response in the quantity. Later in the chapter we will give a more precise definition of elastic and inelastic. In this section, “elastic” simply means flat and “inelastic” simply means steep. In Figure 7.1(a), demand is inelastic; this is probably realistic in the short run when drivers are stuck with cars with a given gas mileage and often have few options on commuting to work. With demand less elastic than supply in Figure 7.1(a), drivers bear most of the burden. In Figure 7.1(b), supply is less elastic than demand which is probably unrealistic—but if it were so, suppliers would bear most of the burden (as shown). What matters is relative elasticities. If demand is steeper (less elastic) than supply \[Figure 7.1(a)], then demanders bear most of the burden. If supply is steeper (less elastic) than demand \[Figure 7.1(b)], then suppliers bear most of the burden. Whoever is less elastic bears most of the burden. # Short Run versus Long Run Although demand for gasoline is inelastic in the short run, it becomes more elastic in the long run. In the short run, most drivers can’t switch cars, but if gas prices stay high, the next car that drivers buy will likely have better gas mileage. However, it is also probably true that supply is inelastic in the short run but becomes more elastic in the long run as resources shift to other sectors of the economy. As both demand and supply gradually become more elastic (flatter) over time, quantity will gradually fall, but it is not obvious what will happen to the division of the tax burden. # The Distribution of the Burden Doesn’t Depend on Who Writes the Check We have assumed that the gas station operator, not the driver, is legally required to write a check to the government for the gasoline tax. What would happen if the government legally required drivers, not station owners, to write the checks for the gasoline tax? It is likely that many drivers would forget, either accidentally or on purpose, to send a check for the full amount that they owed the government. But suppose, unrealistically, that drivers were perfectly honest and kept every gas station receipt. What would happen? The answer is shown in Figure 7.1(c), where we assume the D and S curves are exactly as in Figure 7.1(a) (demand steep and supply flat). If the driver must send the government a check covering $1.00 per gallon, then the demand curve shifts down $1.00. For example, at a price of $3.30, drivers will now demand the quantity that they would have demanded before at a price of $4.30 because they realize that when