\# 178 Public Finance # FIGURE 7.7 (a) The supply curve shifts up. (b) The tax on high-skilled labor reduces the wage of low-skilled labor.

| WH                                                                   | S ′                                    | F | S   | O | $10 |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | - | --- | - | --- |
| $30                                                                  | D                                      | G | D ′ |   |     |
|                                                                      | High-skilled labor                     |   |     |   |     |
|                                                                      | (a) A wage tax on high-skilled workers |   |     |   |     |
| (b) The impact on low-skilled workers of taxing high-skilled workers |                                        |   |     |   |     |

Thus, perhaps surprisingly, low-skilled workers will bear some burden from the progressive wage tax. # The Corporate Income Tax Suppose a tax is imposed on capital invested in one sector of the economy but not elsewhere. For example, because of the corporate income tax, capital invested in corporations is taxed more heavily than capital invested in noncorporate business firms. At first glance it might seem that only investors in the taxed sector would be harmed by the tax, but this is not so in the long run. Suppose without the tax financial investors (savers) earn a 4% rate of return in both the corporate and noncorporate sectors. A corporate tax reduces the after-tax return below 4%. With noncorporate business firms still earning 4%, financial investors will gradually shift capital (funds) into these firms; the shift right of the supply of capital curve to the noncorporate sector will drive down the rate of return below 4%. In the final equilibrium, capital in both the corporate and noncorporate sectors will earn an after-tax return below 4%. Clearly, then, financial investors in both sectors will be burdened by the tax on corporate capital. Furthermore, if the lower after-tax return reduces saving and investment as shown in Figure 7.5, it will reduce the wage as shown in Figure 7.6 so some burden may fall on workers. # INEFFICIENCY Most taxes impose an efficiency loss on the economy. Let’s explain what this inefficiency means. Imagine that $100,000 worth of your favorite mix of goods has been produced and is sitting waiting for you to take it home. As you arrive with your truck you see 10% of the goods—$10,000 worth—get loaded onto a van, driven to a cliff, and dumped into