\# Chapter 10 State and Local Public Finance prey on suburban visitors. If the city is littered with garbage because trash collection is underfunded, suburbanites won’t want to visit. Thus, it is in the self-interest of suburbanites to have the state government raise some revenue from them and transfer the revenue to cities to help fund police and fire protection, trash collection, schools, and parks in center city. But how can self-interested suburbanites ensure that these funds are used to expand center city services from which they benefit and not other services that benefit only city residents (e.g., police and fire protection in low-income city neighborhoods outside center city) or simply cutting the taxes of city residents in response? The state government can give a categorical matching grant. Remember that under a categorical matching grant, the city receives state funds only as a match for its own funds targeted for a particular service. For example, for every dollar the city spends of its own funds for center city police and fire protection, the state might transfer a dollar to the city. The match need not be dollar for dollar; it might be two dollars for each dollar or fifty cents for each dollar. # State Redistribution That Benefits Low-Income City Residents Low-income city residents benefit from having their state government tax high-income suburbanites through an income tax or a sales tax and having the funds transferred to their city. The state government is an instrument by which low-income city residents can extract revenue from high-income people who have moved out of the city to the suburbs. As noted above, if the city itself tries to tax suburbanites through wage income or sales taxes, it may prove counterproductive if the response is elastic—city businesses may move to the suburbs and suburbanites may work and shop in the suburbs instead of the city. By contrast, the state government can redistribute revenue from suburbs to the city without generating this counterproductive relocation effect. If, hypothetically, the state levied a geographic tax—taxing only suburban residents but not city residents—then high- as well as low-income city residents would benefit from the redistribution. But when the state actually levies an income or sales tax, city residents bear their share of the state tax burden in proportion to their income or consumption. Thus, it is not clear whether high-income city residents benefit more from their city’s receipt of state funds than they lose from paying additional state taxes. It is almost certainly the case, however, that low-income city residents gain more from their city’s receipt of state funds than they lose from the slight increase in the state taxes they pay. # A Strategy: Efficiency plus Redistribution For many public finance problems, economists recommend a strategy of efficiency plus redistribution: Adopt policies that promote efficiency but compensate those who would lose from these policies by some redistribution from those who gain. Economists argue that such a strategy promotes fairness as well as efficiency and also has a chance of earning broad political support. How would this strategy apply to state and local public finance? The strategy would call for avoiding taxes that distort behavior and cause substantial inefficiencies. It is understandable why low-income cities surrounded by affluent suburbs would be tempted to try to heavily tax businesses and suburban commuters and shoppers. However, this would be a mistake. Specifically, a city should avoid counterproductive taxes that drive away businesses and suburbanites (as workers or shoppers). In return, suburbanites should agree to politically support a reallocation to the city of a portion of the cash grants they would otherwise receive from the state.