\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment # FIGURE 2.2 The Socially Optimal Quantity of a Polluting Good

|          |        | MSC        |
| -------- | ------ | ---------- |
|          | J      |            |
|          | I      | MD = $1.00 |
| $3.50    | H      | K          |
|          | D (MB) |            |
| 80       | 100    |            |
| Gasoline |        |            |

When deciding how much to supply, producers (sellers) care only about the costs they actually pay—the wages they pay for labor, and the prices they pay for materials and machines. They ignore any cost they don’t pay for—damage to the environment. The marginal social cost (MSC) of a polluting good equals the regular marginal cost due to using up inputs (labor, materials, and machines) plus the marginal damage (MD) to the environment. In the absence of a tax, the MPC is less than the marginal social cost (MSC). The MSC curve is above the MPC curve (when there is no tax) by an amount equal to the MD. In Figure 2.2, the MD that occurs from the car’s exhaust when a gallon of gasoline is burned in an auto engine is $1.00 at any quantity of gasoline. What does it mean to say the MD is $1.00? Here is one answer many economists give. Suppose that if people were informed by health experts of the health consequences, they would together be willing to pay a total of $1.00 to avoid the damage that occurs per gallon burned; then economists would conclude that well-informed people judge the MD per gallon to be $1.00. The height of the demand curve equals the marginal benefit (MB). The MB is the maximum amount that consumers would be willing to pay for that unit. Why? Consider the 100th gallon in Figure 2.2. If the price were $3.50, drivers would be willing to buy 100 gallons, but not a gallon more, so the 100th gallon was a very close decision—to buy or not to buy. That means that the maximum amount drivers are willing to pay for the 100th gallon is very slightly above $3.50, or approximately $3.50. As the number of gallons drivers have already bought increases, the MB declines. The socially optimal quantity of a polluting good is where the MB equals the MSC. In Figure 2.2, the socially optimal quantity is 80 gallons. For each gallon up until the 80th, the MB exceeds the MSC, so society enjoys a net gain (even taking into account the environmental damage) when each gallon is produced. But for each gallon after the 80th, society would suffer a net loss when each gallon is produced (the benefit is not worth the cost of using up regular inputs plus damaging the environment). The competitive market goes to the intersection of D and S, so the competitive market (in the absence of a tax) generates 20 gallons more than the socially optimal.