\# Public Finance One option is for Medicare to develop a system of rationing for such costly services and to try to make it as equitable and cost effective as possible. Suppose that a person age 65 and a person age 100 are afflicted with the same life-threatening illness and that for the same cost—say, $1 million—each can be cured. Suppose that once cured, the 100-year-old is likely to live to 101, and the 65-year-old, to age 85. If there is only enough tax revenue to treat one of them, most citizens would probably prefer saving the 65-year-old rather than the 100-year-old. Rather than provide treatment on a first-come, first-serve basis regardless of age until funds run out, the citizenry might prefer that Medicare give younger retirees priority over very old retirees for this medical service. Thus, it seems likely that the citizenry will have to confront difficult Medicare choices in the years ahead. For further analysis of this topic, see the box, “Should Some Medical Care Be Rationed?” # Health Insurance in Other Countries: An International Perspective What do other countries do about health insurance? Most high-income countries utilize a larger role for government in health insurance than the United States. Many of these countries finance most medical care through taxes rather than private insurance premiums (this is one reason that taxes as a percentage of GDP average about 40% in economically advanced countries but about 30% in the United States). Most of these countries achieve close to universal insurance coverage in contrast to the United States. However, some countries have substantially longer waiting times for obtaining medical care than the United States and have less of the latest medical technology. In this section we take a brief look abroad. Under Britain’s system—the National Health Service (NHS), established in the mid-1940s—the role of government is maximized: The government runs and operates the health care system. Medical care is free and everyone is covered by the NHS. Hospital administrators, physicians who are specialists, and nurses are salaried employees of the government. Physicians who are general practitioners (GPs) are the “gatekeepers” of the system. The government pays GPs according to the number of people—potential patients—for whom they are responsible (capitation payment); they are not paid according to how much medical service they actually provide patients. Persons seeking medical care must first see a GP, who either treats them or evaluates their problem and decides whether they can see a specialist. The system is financed by taxation. Spending for medical care is determined by the government budget process. Britain spends about half as much of its GDP on medical care as does the United States (8% for Britain versus 16% for the United States). With medical care free and supply limited by the budget process, patient demand exceeds supply for many services. As a consequence, the system is characterized by rationing which takes the form of long waits for nonemergency services such as elective surgery; demanders (patients) cannot get as much as they want as soon as they want it. Government planners set priorities for allocating the limited budget for new medical technology and facilities. Doctors evaluate patients and set priorities for use of the limited hospital resources and medical technology. The affluent have the option of paying the full cost of services in a small private sector. With medical care free to patients, the degree of rationing is determined by the level of taxes: The higher the taxes, the greater the supply of medical services, the less severe the rationing. Apparently, British voters are unwilling to pay higher taxes to reduce the current level of rationing. In Canada the role of government in health insurance is less than in Britain but still substantial—similar to the role government plays in health insurance in several Western