\# 156 Public Finance year federal tax return. Income-relating patient cost sharing can be done at low cost with today’s computer technology. Each Medicare recipient would use a “Medicard” to purchase drugs. The pharmacy would be paid by the government, and the patient would be sent a bill every month. The patient would be charged a percentage that would vary inversely with the patient’s income as reported on the preceding year’s federal tax return. The government would contract with private firms to process the bills and collect cost sharing from households. It might be feasible to use income-related cost sharing for other services covered by Medicare. Every retiree covered by Medicare would receive a Medicard to use at the doctor’s office or hospital the way she uses a credit card at a department store. The household would then be billed a percentage that depends on its income as reported on its most recent federal tax return. Once the household’s financial burden reaches a designated percentage of its income, it would not be billed again that year, so Medicare would limit every household’s financial burden to its ability to pay. The government would contract with private firms—insurance companies and credit card companies—under competitive bidding to process medical bills and to bill and collect from patients. Advocates of income-related patient cost sharing contend that it would promote equity and efficiency. Patients are asked to contribute to financing their own medical costs according to their ability to pay, so that the subjective burden is comparable but tolerable for patients at all income levels. At the same time, each patient is given an incentive to weigh the benefit of any service against its cost. Opponents of income-related patient cost sharing make several arguments. First, they point out that the prices of most goods and services in our society are not varied according to the consumer’s income. Second, trying to link patient cost sharing to patient income adds administrative complexity; also, using the preceding year’s tax return may not always be equitable. Third, some conservatives philosophically oppose varying price with income, and some liberals fear that doing so (“means-testing” Medicare) might weaken political support for Medicare among the affluent. # Rationing The word rationing in this section means limiting the use of medical care other than by raising the price to patients. Rationing involves denying some medical care to some people who want the care and would obtain some benefit from the care. The rationale given for such rationing is that the benefit, though positive, is judged by society to be not worth the cost. Imagine that it becomes possible to give each very old person who is about to die one additional year of life but at a medical cost of $1 million per person. How should public policy respond to this prospect? Perhaps the simplest option would be to have the government provide the extra year of life “free” to each person when the time arrives. If the extra year of life is provided free and is not painful, most people will request it, and the citizenry will bear the cost through taxes. Perhaps the tax per person needed to raise $1 million per recipient would be judged tolerable by the citizenry. If so, suppose that the medical cost of an extra year of life were $10 million per recipient. Clearly, there is some sufficiently large medical cost at which many citizens would judge that the benefit is not worth the cost. Then what? If this were a typical good rather than an extra year of life, most economists would recommend charging a price equal to the cost of the good and letting each consumer decide whether to buy it at that price. It is possible to imagine conditions under which