\# Chapter 12 Low–Income Assistance # THE IMPACT OF ASSISTANCE ON POVERTY What is the combined impact of all these programs on poverty—on the well-being of low-income people in the United States? Specifically, what is the impact on the poverty rate—the percentage of the population living below the poverty line? When the official U.S. government poverty line was first propounded in the 1960s, it was estimated that low-income families spent roughly a third of their income on food. Thus, the poverty line was set at three times the amount of money a family would need to purchase a nutritionally adequate diet for all its members; it was assumed that the family would need twice what it spent on food for other necessities. Hence, the official poverty line amount varies with family size and is automatically raised each year according to price inflation in the economy. The poverty line should differ across geographic areas because of the variation in prices (the cost of living), but it doesn’t. So what is the impact of government programs on poverty? To answer this question, clearly all important programs need to be counted and included. Medicaid is the single largest program targeted for low-income people. Medicare spends a very large sum on elderly, low-income people while also spending a large amount on the rest of the elderly population. The Earned Income Tax Credit delivers cash to low-income working families. Yet none of these programs affects the official government measure of poverty in the United States. How can this be? The official government measure of poverty is based on a family’s pretax cash income. Cash transfers like TANF are counted, but huge in-kind benefits like Medicaid and Medicare are not counted. Nor are other in-kind benefits programs that pay for food, housing, or education and training. Nor is the EITC counted because it is treated as an effect of the tax system that doesn’t affect “pretax” cash income. Table 12.2 shows the striking difference between the official poverty rate before in-kind government programs and the EITC, and the poverty rate after all government programs. The table presents data for the five years 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000, and for two additional years when the U.S. economy felt the effects of a recession, 1992 and 2002. Three points are evident from the table. First, in-kind government programs plus the EITC significantly reduce the percentage of the population living below the poverty line; over the period shown in the table, the reduction was roughly one-third (for example, in 2002 from 12% to 8%). Second, the relationship between the two columns has been fairly stable since 1980—the numbers in the right column are roughly two-thirds of the left column over the period. Third, each recent recession temporarily raised the poverty rate about one percentage point.

| Poverty Rates | Poverty Rate Before In-Kind Government Programs & EITC | Poverty Rate After All Government Programs |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------ |
| 1980          | 13.0%                                                  | 8.6%                                       |
| 1985          | 14.0%                                                  | 10.1%                                      |
| 1990          | 13.5%                                                  | 9.5%                                       |
| 1992          | 14.8%                                                  | 10.5%                                      |
| 1995          | 13.8%                                                  | 9.0%                                       |
| 2000          | 11.3%                                                  | 7.6%                                       |
| 2002          | 12.1%                                                  | 8.2%                                       |
