\# Chapter 10 State and Local Public Finance All homes, they are protecting more value for the mansion than for the modest home, and the mansion resident would presumably pay more for protection than the modest homeowner. Fifth, property value roughly reflects ability to pay; the mansion resident generally can afford to pay more tax than the modest homeowner. Sixth, when local government uses a particular tax that is different from the tax used by the state or the federal government, it is easier for local residents to keep track (“Am I getting benefits from local services that outweigh my particular tax burden?”). The federal government uses the income and payroll tax, the state government uses sales and/or income tax, but neither uses the property tax. # Criticisms of the Residential Property Tax for Local Governments Every tax imposes a burden, so it is not surprising that every tax has its critics. The residential property tax is no exception. What are the particular criticisms of this tax? First, the property tax is often paid in a large sum once or twice a year (though some homeowners include a tax payment with each monthly mortgage payment, and the bank writes the large property tax check once or twice a year). By contrast, relatively small amounts of income and payroll tax are withheld from each paycheck, so the taxpayer usually does not have to write a large check to the government. Similarly, a relatively small amount of sales tax is collected at the cash register with each purchase. Of course, a household ends up paying a large sum annually for income, payroll, and sales taxes, but those payments are spread out in small amounts over the entire year rather than concentrated in a single payment. Note that it would be easy for local governments to bill homeowners quarterly or even monthly instead of annually—but few have chosen to do this. Second, the property tax causes more of a cash-flow problem for some taxpayers than other taxes. Taxes must be paid with cash (“cash” here includes checks and credit cards). People receive income in cash and spend with cash, so a tax on income, payroll, or sales can be paid by withdrawing some of the cash from the transaction— withholding some cash from paychecks or collecting some cash at the cash register. By contrast, it is possible to own substantial property yet be short of cash. Some property owners complain that they don’t have the cash to pay their tax. A homeowner cannot sell part of the home to get the cash to pay the tax. Although homeowners could borrow cash from a bank (secured by the property value of the home), borrowing usually isn’t necessary to pay income or sales tax. Third, the property tax is a substantial burden for some retirees who want to continue living in their home. Retirement causes a sharp drop in their income and cash inflow relative to the value of their property and the tax owed on it. If they can’t come up with the cash, retirees may be forced to sell the home they have lived in for many years. For some of the elderly, their home is the only source of wealth, so the tax appears regressive because the tax they owe is a high percentage of either their income or total wealth. To mitigate this problem, some states have enacted circuit breakers which provide a refund through the state income tax to partially reimburse the taxpayer for a local property tax that is high relative to the taxpayer’s income, but not all states do this. Fourth, the property tax is based on a very rough estimate of the home’s value. Because some homes are not sold for many years, the original purchase price is largely out of date as a measure of the home’s current value. Some homeowners believe that their home’s assessed value is too high relative to other homes. By contrast, the amount of income or payroll tax withheld is based on the actual paycheck. Similarly, the sales tax charged is based on the actual expenditure.