\# In The News # The 2007 Minneapolis Interstate Highway Bridge Collapse On August 1, 2007, the interstate highway bridge over the Mississippi River at Minneapolis, Minnesota, collapsed, killing 13, injuring 80, and stranding many cars precariously over the river. The shock of the collapse reverberated around the country. Many claimed that the collapse shows that U.S. bridges and highways (infrastructure) are inadequately maintained and inadequately inspected. The American Society of Civil Engineers estimates that roughly a quarter of U.S. bridges are “structurally deficient or functionally obsolete” and calls for a very large federal expenditure to remedy the deficiency. Economists, however, recommend that cost-benefit analysis be applied to decisions concerning infrastructure maintenance and inspection. Clearly, additional maintenance and inspection have a benefit, but they also have a cost. Additional maintenance or inspection should be undertaken as long as the marginal benefit exceeds the marginal cost, but additional maintenance or inspection should not be undertaken once the marginal benefit drops below the marginal cost. Hence, there is a socially optimal amount of maintenance and inspection—the amount at which the marginal benefit equals the marginal cost. Thus, a bridge collapse is tragic for its victims but in itself does not tell us whether maintenance and inspection have been socially optimal. To decide this question, there is no substitute for estimating the dollar cost of additional maintenance and inspection and comparing it to an estimate of the dollar benefit from reducing the probability that a collapse will occur. One way of estimating the dollar benefit would be to survey a representative sample of the population and ask them how much they would be willing to pay to reduce the probability of collapse by another percentage point (say from 2% to 1%). The aggregate amount that people would be willing to pay should then be compared to the cost incurred in reducing the probability another percentage point as estimated by bridge engineers. # The Value of a Statistical Life Whenever a project would save lives, it is handy for practitioners of cost-benefit analysis to have a rough dollar estimate of the value of a statistical life (VSL)—the value of the life of someone we don’t know personally. If a highway safety project is estimated to save 10 lives per year and the VSL is estimated to be about $8 million, then the project’s benefit from lives saved can be estimated as about $80 million per year, which can then be compared to the project’s cost to decide whether the project should be undertaken. Harvard economists Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy, after a comprehensive review of empirical research, report a median estimate of the VSL that in 2008 dollars would be about $8 million (they reported an average VSL of about $7 million in 2003 which translates into about $8 million today due to inflation).1 It is important to emphasize that the estimate of $8 million per life should be used with great caution. Many controversial assumptions and techniques are used in studies to arrive at a dollar estimate of a statistical life. Varying these assumptions and techniques might well cause a large change in the VSL estimate. Moreover, the appropriate value of the VSL might vary according to the project being considered. The figure of $8 million per life doesn’t distinguish between a young life and an old life—while some citizens would value any life the same, others would not. The $8 million figure also doesn’t distinguish between the kind of death that is avoided, but people may feel differently about different circumstances. 1 Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27, no. 1, pp. 5–76.