\# Public Finance It’s time to leave our island and return to a realistic examination of governmental institutions and behavior. # THE BEHAVIOR OF GOVERNMENT # Voting, Legislators, Policies, and Elections Decisions about public goods are made by a legislature (perhaps with the approval of an executive)—not by citizens directly. The legislators are elected by the citizens to represent them. Of course, this does not automatically mean that the legislature will do what the citizens want. Whatever other motives they may have, legislators generally want to be reelected. Let’s consider how this may affect the legislators’ voting on a public good. # Candidates Dove and Hawk Consider an election campaign between two candidates, Dove and Hawk, and assume the election will be decided by one issue: spending on national defense. The voters want to know the percentage of the budget each candidate favors spending on national defense. As shown in Figure 3.3, the preference of the voters ranges from 0% spending (extreme Dove) to 40% spending (extreme Hawk), and voter opinion is spread out smoothly between 0% and 40%, so that the median voter prefers 20%: half the voters—Dovish voters—prefer spending between 0% and 20% on national defense, and half the voters—Hawkish voters—prefer spending between 20% and 40% on national defense. Dove’s personal preference is to spend 10%, while Hawk’s personal preference is 30%. Each realizes that whoever takes a public position further from the middle of the electorate (20%) will lose the election. If both candidates want to avoid losing the election, both will announce public support for spending 20%. There are two reasons why the two candidates might not move to the middle (20%). First, each would like to be elected while keeping as close to his personal preference as possible. Each may have gone into politics partly due to genuine concern about defense spending. Second, each candidate had to have his party’s nomination—in Dove’s party, voter preference ranged from 0% to 20%, while in Hawk’s party, voter preference ranged from 20% to 40%. In the primary election that determined the party’s nominee, each candidate took a public position right in the middle of his party’s voters (Dove 10%, Hawk 30%). This is one reason that each candidate won his primary election and is now his party’s candidate in the general election. Changing positions now might have two negative effects. First, voters might question his honesty. Second, his own base—the supporters in his own party who are helping raise money for campaign ads—might lose enthusiasm. This would reduce the ad campaign, making it harder to win over undecided voters. # FIGURE 3.3 # Primary and General Election Voting

| To win the primary,  | Dovish voters       | Hawkish voters     |     |     |     |
| -------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------ | --- | --- | --- |
| • • • • •            | • • • • •           |                    |     |     |     |
| Dove favors 10% and  | 0%                  | 10%                | 20% | 30% | 40% |
| Hawk favors 30%; but | to win the general, | 20% would be best. |     |     |     |
