\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance The challenge for public policy is to improve the efficiency and equity of medical care and health insurance without impeding incentives for continuing innovation and progress in the quality of medical care. # PRINCIPLES OF HEALTH INSURANCE # The Genesis of Health Insurance What would happen if the government played no role in health insurance? There would still be health insurance, because entrepreneurs would start private companies to sell health insurance. So why not leave health insurance to the private sector? After all, most economists argue that the government should play no role for most goods and services because the free market does a very satisfactory job. To decide whether government should intervene, let us first investigate what would happen if we left health insurance to the free market. Imagine that you live in a society without health insurance, and you must pay your own medical bills. In this society, most people have good health and have no trouble paying their modest bills, but a few people are not so lucky; they require a hospital episode and get hit with a huge medical bill. Assume that at the beginning of each year, no one knows whether a hospital episode is coming, so even the majority, who end up fine, worry about being blindsided by a huge medical and financial blow. Often you find yourself asking, “What will I do if I’m hit with a huge medical bill?” Suppose you hear that someone has started a health insurance company. If you buy insurance by paying a premium (the price of the insurance) to this company, the company will pay your entire medical bill. Suppose you, and everyone else, have a 5% chance that a hospital episode will hit you with a $61,000 bill and a 95% chance that your medical bill will only be $1,000. What is the most you would be willing to pay for the insurance? There’s no right or wrong answer. Your answer depends on how risk-averse you are. If you’re very worried (averse to a risk) about the hospital bill, you’ll pay a lot for insurance; if you’re not that worried, you’ll pay less. # Starting a Health Insurance Company Now imagine that you’ve just graduated from college in this society, and you decide to start a health insurance company. But can you make money selling health insurance? There are many factors to consider as you crunch the numbers. Initially you assume that insurance won’t change anyone’s medical bill—5% will still have a $61,000 bill and 95% will still have a $1,000 bill—and that no one has inside information about her own health prospects, so everyone assumes her chances are 5% and 95%, respectively. For every 100 people who buy your insurance, 5 people are likely to incur a $61,000 bill, and 95 people, a $1,000 bill. Hence, your expected total bill from hospitals and doctors for your enrollees will be:

| 5($61,000) | 95($1,000) | $305,000 | $95,000 | $400,000 |
| ---------- | ---------- | -------- | ------- | -------- |

To obtain premium revenue of $400,000 from your 100 enrollees, you must charge a premium of $4,000 per enrollee. As long as you charge a premium of at least $4,000 and enrollees are willing to pay your premium, for every 100 persons you will take in at least $400,000 in revenue, thereby covering your expected cost of $400,000. Let’s redo the calculation using a concept from statistics: expected value. What is the expected value—the average, or mean, value—of the medical bill per enrollee? If a person has a 5% chance of incurring a $61,000 medical bill and a 95% chance of...