\# Public Finance # Case Study # A Brief History of the Top Income Tax Rate In the early 1960s the top income tax rate was over 90%! It should be emphasized that only a tiny number of very rich people were subject to the top rate, and only on the top portion of their income (most of their income was subject to much lower tax rates), and that more than half of capital gains income was excluded from taxation. The United States was not the only country with a top tax rate over 90% at that time. In the early 1960s, four working-class lads from Liverpool, England, exploded on the world music scene. The four Beatles were soon earning huge incomes, and to their shock, they found themselves subject to huge income taxes. One of them, George Harrison, wrote a song with an angry lead guitar riff for the Beatles’ Revolver album; the song, called “Tax Man,” begins:

> Let me tell you how it will be, There’s one for you nineteen for me, ’Cause I’m the Tax Man, Yea, I’m the Tax Man.

According to Harrison, the Beatles were subject to a top tax rate of 95%, because out of the last 20 British pounds they earned, the tax man took 19, leaving them with only 1 (19 20 95%). Go online to get the rest of the lyrics to “Tax Man,” listen to Harrison and the Beatles sing it, and hear Harrison play his angry guitar. Back in the United States, the top rate was cut to 70% in the 1960s, 50% in the early 1980s under President Reagan, and 28% under the Tax Reform Act of 1986 enacted with bipartisan support. The 1986 act was a compromise: The Democrats accepted President Reagan’s proposal to lower the top tax rate from 50% to 28%, and in return, the president and the Republicans accepted the Democrats’ proposal to include all capital gains in taxable income and tax it at the same rate as labor income. At the 1988 Republican convention, Vice President George H. W. Bush, the nominee for president, said to thunderous applause, “Read my lips: No new taxes.” But in 1990, faced with continuing huge federal budget deficits, President Bush compromised with the Democratic Congress. Democrats agreed to accept his proposal to limit the growth in domestic spending, and he agreed to accept their proposal to raise the top rate from 28% to 31% while keeping the maximum tax rate on capital gains at 28%. Although his acceptance of 31% displeased many conservatives, this compromise was the first step in the successful bipartisan effort during the 1990s to bring down huge budget deficits and eventually achieve a surplus by the end of the decade with the help of a booming economy. The next step came in 1993 when Democratic President Bill Clinton and a Democratic Congress raised the top rate to 39.6% while keeping the maximum tax rate on capital gains at 28%. In the November 1994 election, the Republicans won control of both houses of Congress for the first time in many decades and in 1997 (with President Clinton’s reluctant acceptance) reduced the maximum tax rate on capital gains from 28% to 20%. With the election of Republican George W. Bush in November 2000 and the continued control of Congress by Republicans, the top tax rate was cut from 39.6% to 35% in 2001, and the top tax rate on capital gains and dividends was cut to 15% in 2003. In the 2008 election, the Democrats pledged to increase the top rate several percentage points while the Republicans pledged to oppose such an increase. The AMT does not permit the exemptions, deductions, and credits of the regular income tax; instead, in order to restrict its application to high-income households, the AMT has a single large exemption. Under current law, in contrast to the regular income tax which is automatically indexed for inflation, the dollar amounts of the AMT exemption and of its tax brackets stay fixed over time unless Congress specifically votes to raise them. It would be easy for Congress to make sure the AMT remains restricted to the very affluent by indexing the AMT—automatically raising the exemption and tax brackets each year as average household income increases in the economy. Thus far Congress has not indexed the AMT; the moment that Congress passes a law to index the AMT, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) will be required to announce a huge increase in.