\# 134 Public Finance incurring a $1,000 medical bill, then the expected value of the person’s medical cost (the expected medical cost) is .05($61,000) + .95($1,000) = $3,050 + $950 = $4,000. As long as your premium is at least $4,000, it looks like you’ll make a profit. However, there are some complications that will reduce your profit. First, there’s some risk that your medical bills will be more than $400,000 per 100 enrollees. You can’t be sure that exactly 5% of your enrollees will have a $61,000 medical bill. If you flip a coin a million times, you can be sure that heads will come up very close to 50% and tails, 50%. But if you only flip the coin 10 times, it is quite possible for heads to come up much higher or lower than 50%. In statistics this is called the law of large numbers. You have to make sure that you operate on a large enough scale—enroll enough people—so that the law of large numbers will get your percentages close to 5% and 95%. Second, even though people are willing to pay a lot more than $4,000 to buy insurance, this doesn’t mean you will be able to charge as much as they would pay. The price that you will be able to charge depends on whether you have competition from other insurance companies. If you’re the only insurance company, you can charge a lot more than $4,000. However, if you can make a substantial profit selling health insurance at this high price, others are bound to start rival insurance companies. To attract enrollees away from you, these companies may charge less than you’re charging, and you’ll have to cut your premium to retain enrollees. Of course, the other companies can’t cut their premium below their expected cost. As long as you operate efficiently—that is, keep your operating cost to a minimum—you’ll be able to match their premium, retain a solid market share, and make enough revenue to cover all your costs (including your own compensation). Competition will force you to charge an actuarially fair premium—a premium that just covers the expected cost of your enrollees. In the example above, the actuarially fair premium would equal the expected value of the medical cost per person, $4,000. Third, you will incur costs operating the insurance company. You’ll need to pay employees to sign up enrollees, process the medical bills, and pay the hospitals and doctors, and you’ll need to compensate yourself for your time and effort. You’ll need to rent office space or perhaps construct your own office building, which may require borrowing money to finance the construction. You’ll need to advertise. These operating costs will cut down your profit. You will need to figure out your operating costs per 100 enrollees to make sure that your revenue will cover all your costs. You’ll have to charge more than $4,000 to cover these costs. # Price Equals Expected Medical Cost Would you charge everyone the same premium? Immediately you realize that it would be very useful to get some medical information about each enrollee. Before you enroll someone, why not require the person to answer questions about health history? You may not always get accurate information, but for our example, let’s assume that you do. Suppose that a high-expected-cost person has a 9% chance of incurring a $61,000 medical bill. Then, as indicated in Table 6.1, the high-cost person’s expected medical cost is .09($61,000) + .91($1,000) = $5,490 + $910 = $6,400. Suppose a low-expected-cost person has only a 1% chance of incurring a $61,000 medical bill. Then, as indicated in Table 6.1, the low-cost person’s expected medical cost is .01($61,000) + .99($1,000) = $610 + $990 = $1,600.