\# 300 Public Finance One rationale given for the EITC is that it offsets the burden of the Social Security payroll tax for low-income households. Why not simply exempt the first few thousand dollars of wage income from the payroll tax? One reason is that this exemption would complicate the employer’s task of implementing the payroll tax for Social Security. Another is that an exemption might weaken the political claim of these workers to Social Security benefits upon retirement. Another is that such an exemption would be poorly targeted, because some workers with low-wage income are members of high-income families. Thus, the EITC can be viewed as a well-targeted vehicle for offsetting the burden of the payroll tax on workers from low-income households. The initial support for the EITC in the 1970s came mainly from conservatives who viewed the EITC as an alternative to welfare. Its originator was Senator Russell Long, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee which handles all tax legislation; he believed that welfare discourages work. Long first proposed his work bonus in 1972 and received an endorsement from California Governor Ronald Reagan. It wasn’t until the recession of 1975 that Long got the EITC enacted as a provision of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975, which gave a tax rebate to all households to stimulate consumption spending to counter the recession. To include low-income working households who hadn’t paid income tax, Long attached to the bill a new refundable 10% tax credit for poor families—the Earned Income Tax Credit. Thus, the Earned Income Tax Credit became law, not as part of a debate on low-income assistance, but as part of an effort to respond to a recession. With most other Americans receiving a new income tax rebate, it seemed only fair to give some cash assistance to the working poor, all of whom were subject to the payroll tax but many of whom did not pay any income tax. Hence, the new tax credit was made refundable in order to reach the working poor. Over the next decade and a half, the EITC remained a small program with only a modest increase in the phase-in rate and a modest increase in the maximum credit. The EITC’s conservative origins delayed its acceptance by liberals, but eventually they came to appreciate the EITC as an effective instrument for helping an important share of low-income people—those who worked. Liberals realized they could make more political headway with the EITC that conservatives supported than with welfare or the minimum wage, which conservatives opposed. By 1990, liberals had become supporters of the EITC, despite its conservative origins. With bipartisan support, two major EITC expansions were enacted in 1990 and 1993. The 1990 expansion raised the phase-in rate to nearly 20% for a family with two or more children. The expansion raised the maximum credit from under $1,000 in 1990 to over $1,500 in 1993, and total credits doubled from $7.5 billion in 1990 to over $15 billion in 1993. The 1993 expansion doubled the phase-in rate to 40%, more than doubled the maximum credit from $1,500 in 1993 to $3,500 in 1996, and doubled total credits from $15 billion in 1993 to nearly $30 billion 1996. Thus, the two expansions nearly quadrupled total credits from $7.5 billion 1990 to nearly $30 billion in 1996. Two opposite concerns have been expressed about the EITC. One is that some low-income people who are entitled to the EITC are not getting it. For example, some eligible people have never heard of the EITC and don’t file a tax return because they owe no income tax. Outreach and publicity campaigns have tried to reduce the “under-participation” rate. The opposite concern is that some people obtain the EITC who are not supposed to or get more than they should. For example, some intentionally commit fraud by falsely claiming labor earnings or children in residence; some are confused about EITC rules concerning the definition of a qualifying child, the required filing status, and the determination of which family member (parent or grandparent with