\# Chapter 4 Cost-Benefit Analysis # GOVERNMENT # Building a Highway The same logic and analysis applies when the investment project is undertaken by government. While private firms invest in factories, government invests in infrastructure, such as roads and bridges. Let’s consider the use of cost-benefit analysis to evaluate the construction of a highway. The cost of the highway has two components: construction costs (e.g., labor, equipment, and asphalt) and future maintenance (repair) costs. Computing the present value by “discounting” future maintenance costs, and adding construction costs, gives the present value of the cost of the highway. The benefit is how much drivers would be willing to pay to use the highway in all future years. Discounting each year’s benefit and summing over all future years gives the present value of the benefits of the highway. But how can the benefits be estimated in practice? Highways save drivers time, so it would be possible to estimate how many hours are saved. If we can then put a dollar value on the time that is saved, we would have an estimate of the benefits of the highway because this is what drivers should be willing to pay to use the highway. But how can we put a dollar value on time saved? In order to put a dollar value on time saved, drivers can be placed along a spectrum, and different drivers’ willingness to pay must be estimated and then aggregated. At one end of the spectrum are truck drivers carrying cargo. At the other end are people seeking noncommercial objectives, such as recreation, visiting friends, or vacation. In between are people commuting to work. For truck drivers with cargo, the issue is dollars and cents. The managers in business firms transporting cargo can figure out how much money they would save by reducing the time required to ship their goods; these managers should be willing to pay an amount equal to this saving from the time reduction. The first task of the cost-benefit analyst would be to estimate this cost saving of firms shipping cargo; this constitutes one important component of the total benefit of the highway. In the rest of this section, we concentrate on commuters and then provide a brief comment on noncommercial drivers. # Increased Output One approach to measuring the benefits of time saved is to estimate how much more output commuters could produce at work. Economists generally assume that the wage a worker is paid provides a rough measure of the output the worker produces. Suppose a commuter would save an hour a day by using the highway. If the commuter works the hour instead of driving and is paid a wage of $20 an hour, economists estimate that the highway has enabled $20 more output to be produced. If the commuter works 250 days per year (5 days a week for 50 weeks), her additional annual wage income enabled by the highway is $5,000. Summing actual wage income enabled by the highway over all commuters yields an estimate of the annual aggregate increase in output made possible by the highway. The PV of benefits is obtained by discounting future annual benefits and summing over the life of the highway.