\# Public Finance Deductible, so only the amount of a gift in excess of $12,000 per recipient is subject to the estate tax. Roughly 99% of all estates are exempt from the federal estate tax because a very large tax credit eliminates all but the very largest estates—estates valued above $2 million in 2008, which are roughly the top 1% —from being taxed, so the U.S. estate tax is a very progressive tax. Most family businesses and farms are exempt from tax. Above the exemption, estate tax rates rise gradually to a maximum over 40%, but because of the $2 million exemption, the tax paid is generally less than 20% of the value of the estate. Congress has scheduled an increase in the exemption to $3.5 million in 2009 and then the complete repeal of the estate tax in 2010. By taxing the top 1% of estates, the U.S. estate tax raises about 1% of federal tax revenue, or about 0.2% of GDP (because federal revenue is roughly 20% of GDP); for example, if federal tax revenue were 20.0% of GDP in a given year, then without the estate tax, federal revenue would be 19.8% of GDP. # Taxing Gifts and Inheritances Received under the Income Tax Some reformers propose taxing gifts and inheritances received under the income tax either as a substitute for or a complement to taxing large estates. According to this perspective, the recipient should pay tax according to the recipient’s income—the higher the income, the higher the tax the recipient must pay. This can be implemented simply by including any gift or bequest received as a component of the recipient’s income on the annual income tax return. Currently under the income tax, an inheritance—a gift or bequest received—is not counted in the recipient’s income even though it clearly raises a recipient’s ability to pay tax, consume, and save. The change would remedy this omission. Note that a bequest (or even a gift given while the donor is alive) may be a large sum that pushes the recipient into a higher tax bracket for that year; but note also that this is true for other kinds of income (for example, realized capital gains from the sale of stock bought many years ago at a much lower price). If only financial gifts were taxed, donors might give nonfinancial gifts. To prevent this, large nonfinancial gifts might be subject to tax—to implement this, the recipient might be required to report the value of large nonfinancial gifts, such as a home, a car, a painting, expensive clothing or jewelry, and other consumer durables. # Should Wealth Be Taxed Annually or Periodically? Why not tax wealth annually or periodically (say every five years) rather than only at death? It can be argued that wealth is even a better measure of ability to pay than income. Consider two households with $60,000 of income. Suppose the first household has $400,000 of financial wealth (stocks, bonds, and a savings account that sum to $400,000), while the second household has no financial wealth (no stocks or bonds, and nothing in its savings account). Despite their equality of income, the first household with $400,000 of financial wealth has a greater ability to pay tax than the second household with no financial wealth. Nevertheless, few countries tax households annually or even periodically on their wealth. There are a number of reasons for this:

* Some components of wealth are hard to measure. Although the prices of corporate stocks traded daily are easily measured, shares of ownership in other businesses are not. Also, the market value of nonfinancial assets, such as a home, a car, a painting, or expensive jewelry, is difficult to measure; the past purchase price (even adjusted for intervening inflation) may provide a poor measure.