\# Public Finance be only about 70% of scheduled benefits under current benefit rules. That’s why, prior to 2040, the Trust Fund will have to cash in some of its Treasury bonds every year to be able to pay scheduled benefits. So when the bonds are gone, there will be a 30% gap. What will happen? At one extreme, Congress could raise $100 instead of $70 in payroll taxes and keep benefits unchanged; at the other extreme, Congress could cut benefits from $100 to $70, keeping payroll taxes unchanged. Most likely, Congress will split the difference: It will probably raise payroll taxes from $70 to $85 (roughly a 20% increase, from the current combined employer plus employee rate of 12.4% to roughly 15%), and cut benefits from $100 to $85 (a 15% cut, from a current replacement rate of about 40% to 34%). # Description of the Current U.S. Social Security Program Social Security is financed by a payroll tax authorized by the Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA). Legally, half the tax is levied on the worker and half on the employer. Administratively, the employer sends both halves to the government (the employer withholds the worker’s half from the worker’s paycheck), so workers do not write any checks to the government to pay for Social Security. The worker and the employer each owe a tax equal to 6.2% of wage income up to a payroll tax ceiling of $102,000 in 2008; each year the ceiling is automatically increased with the wage growth in the economy. For a worker who earns $102,000 in 2008, the employer sends 12.4%, or $12,648, to the government. If a worker examines his pay stubs, he will see that $6,324 (6.2%) has been taken out of his paychecks over the year; he will not see the other $6,324 that the employer legally owes and also sends to the government. If a worker earns more than $102,000 in 2008, no further payment is made to the government for the rest of the year. For example, for a worker who makes $136,000 in 2008, tax payments will be made for three-quarters of the year from January through September, before earnings reach $102,000; from October through December, no payments will be made, and the worker will note a jump in his take-home pay during the last three months of the year. # Table 5.4 Payroll Tax Rate, Taxable Ceiling, and Maximum Tax, from 1983 to 2008

| Year | Employee Tax Rate | Taxable Ceiling | Maximum Employee Tax | Combined Tax Rate | Maximum Combined Tax |
| ---- | ----------------- | --------------- | -------------------- | ----------------- | -------------------- |
| 1983 | 5.4%              | $35,700         | $1,928               | 10.8%             | $3,856               |
| 1984 | 5.7%              | $37,800         | $2,155               | 11.4%             | $4,309               |
| 1990 | 6.2%              | $51,300         | $3,181               | 12.4%             | $6,361               |
| 2007 | 6.2%              | $97,500         | $6,045               | 12.4%             | $12,090              |
| 2008 | 6.2%              | $102,000        | $6,324               | 12.4%             | $12,648              |
