\# 186 Public Finance # The Revenue-Rate Curve Consider a tax on wage income. As the tax rate *t* increases from 0%, tax revenue (*tWH*) increases. However, when the tax rate reaches 100%, presumably no one would work, and revenue would fall to zero (because *H* would be zero). Thus, the relationship between tax revenue and the tax rate—the revenue-rate curve—is shown in Figure 7.11. Clearly, there is some tax rate between 0% and 100% that maximizes tax revenue; in the figure, we indicate this revenue-maximizing rate as *tₘ*. The shape of the revenue-rate curve, with revenue equal to zero at tax rates of 0% and 100% and the maximum revenue at a tax rate somewhere in between, has long been known by economists, and practical policy makers have long recognized that at some point (*tₘ*) raising the tax rate further is counterproductive in that it yields less revenue. The tax rate *t* should be set somewhere between 0 and *tₘ* but not above *tₘ*. What is the numerical value of *tₘ*? Is it high or low? Is it higher or lower than the current tax rate on wage income? Here economists disagree. The majority of economists believe that *tₘ* is high, closer to 100% than 0%, so that the current tax rate on wage income, which is below 50% (including both income and payroll tax rates), is substantially lower than *tₘ*. The majority view is drawn in Figure 7.11. If the majority is correct, then starting from the current tax rate, if the rate is increased, revenue will increase, and if the rate is decreased, revenue will decrease. However, a minority of economists, sometimes called supply-siders, believe that *tₘ* is low, closer to 0% than 100%, and that the current tax rate on wage income is greater than *tₘ*. If the minority is correct, then starting from the current tax rate, if the rate is increased, revenue will decrease, and if the rate is decreased, revenue will increase—a tax rate cut will “pay for itself”—so that when the tax rate is cut, there is no need to cut government spending. Several decades ago economist Arthur Laffer contended that the current tax rate is greater than *tₘ* in Figure 7.11. Because of this, some began to refer to the revenue-rate curve as the “Laffer curve.” However, this confuses the issue. All economists agree about the shape of the revenue-rate curve. The disagreement is over Laffer’s hypothesis that the current tax rate is greater than *tₘ*. # FIGURE 7.11 # The Revenue-Rate Curve The income tax rate that maximizes revenue is less than 100%.

| Tax revenue |      |
| ----------- | ---- |
| 0%          |      |
| tₘ          | 100% |
