\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment # FIGURE 2.4 The Net Benefit from the Optimal Tax The net benefit equals the environmental benefit minus the loss from the cutback of the good.

| MSC      | J           | $1.00 |
| -------- | ----------- | ----- |
| I        | MD= S (MPC) | $3.50 |
| Price    | H           | K     |
| D (MB)   | 80          | 100   |
| Gasoline |             |       |

If the environmental benefit were not counted, the cutback would impose a loss on the economy; that loss would equal the area HIK. Why? Consider the cutback of the 99th unit. From Figure 2.4, the MB that consumers would have been willing to pay for this unit is a bit greater than $3.50—call it $3.53—so the loss to consumers from not having this unit is $3.53. On the other hand, by not producing the 99th unit, there is a resource saving equal to the MPC which is a bit less than $3.50—call it $3.48—and these resources can be redeployed to make other goods. So the loss to society from not producing the 99th unit is $3.53 ⫺ $3.48 ⫽ $0.05. Similarly, the loss from not producing the 98th unit is $3.56 ⫺ $3.46 ⫽ $0.10. Finally, the loss from not producing the 80th unit is $4.10 ⫺ $3.10 ⫽ $1.00. Adding the losses over all units cut gives the area HIK; the area of the triangle HIK equals ½($1.00 ⫻ 20) ⫽ $10. Thus, cutting back pollution to the social optimum confers an environmental benefit equal to the area HIJK($20) and imposes a loss on the economy due to the reduction in the polluting good that is equal to the area HIK ($10). Hence the net benefit to society of the cutback equals the area IJK ⫽ HIJK ⫻ HIK ⫽ $20 ⫻ $10 ⫽ $10. Even though this cutback confers a net benefit, it is often said that cutting back pollution imposes a cost or loss on the economy by reducing the quantity of the polluting good that consumers enjoy; this cost (loss) is area HIK ($10). While it is useful to measure this loss HIK ($10), it should always be remembered that the cutback confers an environmental benefit HIJK ($20), and hence a net benefit to society equal to IJK ⫽ HIJK ⫻ HIK ⫽ $20 ⫻ $10 ⫽ $10. In this example the MD is $1.00 regardless of the quantity of gasoline, so the proper tax is $1.00. Suppose the MD increases with the quantity of gasoline. What tax should be levied? The answer is easily obtained by modifying Figure 2.2. If MD increases, then the vertical gap between MSC and MPC widens as gasoline increases. Imagine redrawing the MSC curve in Figure 2.2 so it is steeper than the MPC curve to make the vertical gap widen as quantity increases, and locating the intersection of the new steeper MSC curve and the D(MB) curve. This is the socially optimal quantity of gasoline. At this optimal quantity, note the MD, the vertical gap between MSC and MPC; the proper tax equals that MD. If that tax is levied,