\# 292 Public Finance Admission to all residents, but high-income towns can afford higher-quality public schools than low-income inner cities. While high-income parents apply some pressure to public school teachers and administrators by their ability to send their children to private schools, low-income parents cannot exert this pressure; a refundable tax credit for private school tuition would enable parents to exert this pressure and give them a means to escape an unsatisfactory public school. By setting zero tuition, public schools must be financed entirely by taxes. This financing benefits the parents of public school children but not other taxpayers. It also creates a large tuition gap between public and private schools that creates certain problems. The optimal quality of a public school occurs where the marginal benefit from additional quality equals the marginal cost of providing additional quality. Whether the optimal quality is chosen depends partly on the tax used to finance schools. State government is a vehicle to redistribute funds from high- to low-income school districts. There are pros and cons to raising the percentage of school financing that comes from state rather than local government. One method of improving public school quality would be to link each teacher’s salary more to performance and less to seniority. Obtaining higher education has costs and benefits. The costs are forgone earnings and tuition. The benefits are monetary and nonmonetary. Except for the affluent, obtaining higher education usually requires borrowing. In a system of private colleges charging full tuition with no government involvement, there would be a serious problem: Many individuals for whom the benefits of college exceed the costs would be unable to get a loan to attend because they cannot offer lenders collateral in case of default. Public colleges that charge tuition well below cost alleviate this problem. However, these colleges require taxes that often burden families that do not have children attending the public colleges. Government low-interest loans and financial aid also alleviate the collateral problem, but it might be possible to improve their design. Loan repayments might be adjusted according to the graduate’s income, and federal financial aid might be delivered by a refundable tax credit on the federal income tax return that gives the largest help to low-income students and phases down gradually as family income rises; parents of high school juniors could be notified of the amount of the credit through a simple postcard.