\# Public Finance # Appendix # Tax Incidence and Inefficiency In the appendix to Chapter 1, we introduced the indifference-curve/budget-line diagram. Before reading this appendix, review the appendix to Chapter 1. # A TAX ON LABOR INCOME USING AN INDIFFERENCE-CURVE/BUDGET LINE DIAGRAM We now use an indifference-curve/budget-line diagram to analyze the effect of removing a wage tax on labor supply. We assume that a person gets utility (subjective well-being) from two goods: leisure and after-tax income. Each hour that a person works earns him after-tax income but sacrifices an hour of leisure. We assume that the person is offered a job with a specific after-tax wage but that he is given a choice about how many hours to work per year—that is, how many hours of labor to supply per year. The person can vary his annual hours of labor supply by varying his hours per day, days of work per week, and/or vacations. Of course, employers usually do not give an employee completely free choice over the number of hours—but many employers do give some choice. Figure 7A.1(a) shows the indifference-curve/budget-line diagram. Leisure (hours) is plotted horizontally, and after-tax income (dollars) is plotted vertically. With 365 days in a year and 24 hours in a day, there are 8,760 hours in a year. We define any hour that the person is not working in the market place to be an hour of leisure (so “leisure” includes time sleeping, caring for children, doing home chores or repairs, etc.). Suppose the person works 40 hours per week for 50 weeks, 2000 hours, and takes a 2-week vacation. Then the person “consumes” 8,760 - 2,000 = 6,760 hours of leisure in the year. As shown in the diagram, the maximum possible hours of leisure per year is 8,760 hours, so point M is a point on the person’s budget line (a point he could choose). Suppose the after-tax wage is $12 (because the before-tax wage is $16 and the wage tax is $4). If the person worked 2,000 hours, he would earn $24,000 after taxes and would enjoy 6,760 hours of leisure, so another point on the person’s budget line is point A. The person can choose any point on his budget line, the line from M through A to point N. Starting at point M, for each hour of leisure the person gives up in order to work, he gains $12 of after-tax income. Thus, the slope of the person’s budget line NAM is –$12. The person can choose any point on his budget line. We assume the person chooses the point on his budget line that maximizes utility—that reaches the highest indifference curve—so the person chooses point A. Point A has 6,760 hours of leisure (2,000 hours of market work) and an after-tax income of $24,000. Now suppose the tax is removed for all workers and the after-tax wage rises above $12. The removal of the tax may reduce the market wage—assume it reduces it from $16 to $15. Then the after-tax wage rises from $12 to $15, and in the diagram the person’s budget line becomes steeper (because the slope changes from –$12 to –$15), and he moves from point A to point B, which is the point on the steeper budget line that reaches the highest indifference curve. As drawn, point B is directly above (“north of”) point A, but this need not be so; point B might be either northeast or northwest of point A rather than directly north. As drawn, the removal of the tax and the rise in the after-tax wage from $12 to $15 do not cause this person to change his annual hours.