\# Chapter 5 Social Security retirement stage. The bad and good exactly cancel so that raising *t* has no effect on your *r\**. If you look at the derivation in the box, you can see where *t* cancels out. Of course, if the government increases *t* just as you retire so that the *t* during your retirement is greater than the *t* you paid as a worker, this increase in *t* will increase your *r\**; symmetrically, if the government decreases *t* just as you retire so that the *t* during your retirement is less than the *t* you paid as a worker, then this decrease in *t* will decrease your *r\**. In our example in Table 5.2, everything is in terms of a time period of 30 years, where each person works for one period and retires for one period. But suppose each person works for *X* years and retires for *Y* years, where *X* and *Y* differ? And suppose we use annual rates for *gL* and *gW*—for example, suppose *gL* is 1% per year and *gW* is 2% per year. And finally suppose we use an annual rate for *r\**—after all, when we put money in our bank account, we want to know the interest rate per year. For example, an *r* of 3% means that if we put $100 in our account, it will earn $3 of interest in one year, and we then say that we’ve earned an annual rate of return of 3%. Does the formula, *r\* = gL + gW + gLgW*, remain valid?¹ The answer is yes.² The growth rate of labor *gL* is roughly 1% per year, and the growth rate of the real (inflation-adjusted) wage *gw* is roughly 2% per year (because *gw* usually equals the growth rate of labor productivity—output per worker—which is roughly 2% per year), so the annual rate of return when workers support retirees is approximately equal to 3% (*r\* ≈ 3%*) because with annual rates: *r\* = gL + gW + gLgW* *r\* = 1% + 2% + (1%)(2%)* *r\* ≈ 3%* # Rate of Return When Each Generation Is Self-Sufficient Now let’s return to the second row of Table 5.1, where each generation is self-sufficient. Workers save in bank accounts or by buying bonds or stocks, and when they retire, they obtain the principal (what they saved) plus earnings. When banks lend the saving to firms or when workers buy bonds or stocks, the saving is then invested in real capital—equipment, plant, and technology. Assume that every $100 that is invested raises the revenue that firms generate by $6 per year—in other words, assume that the marginal product of capital (mpk) is 6%. Next comes a key assumption: If there is competition among firms for workers’ saving, firms will end up having to offer workers roughly $6 of interest, dividends, or capital gains (the rise in the price of stock) on every $100 of their saving—a rate of return of 6% (firms can’t afford to offer more than the mpk). If this assumption is correct and if there is no tax, then workers would receive a rate of return on their saving equal to the marginal product of capital, so *r\** would equal the mpk. So which is likely to be larger, (*gL + gW + gLgW*) or *mpk*? The growth rate of labor *gᴸ* is roughly 1% per year, and the growth rate of the real (inflation-adjusted) wage *W* on average roughly equals the growth rate of labor productivity which is roughly 2% per year, so the rate of return when workers support retirees is roughly 3% per year. Estimating the marginal product of capital is difficult; the mpk varies across firms and 1 The appendix to this chapter shows how to define and calculate your annual rate of return *r\** under Social Security if you work for 40 years and retire for 20 years. 2 Laurence Seidman, “Social Security and Demographics in a Life Cycle Growth Model,” National Tax Journal 36, no. 2 (June 1983), p. 219.