\# 242 Public Finance # Differences There are two important differences between a consumption tax and a labor income tax: (1) fairness and (2) capital accumulation. Let’s consider each difference in turn. # First, fairness: Consider a lazy heir who inherits a fortune, never works a day in his life, and each year spends part of his fortune, thereby enjoying extravagant consumption. Under a labor income tax, the lazy heir owes no tax. Under a consumption tax, the lazy heir owes substantial tax each year. More generally, under a consumption tax, any household enjoying high consumption owes a high tax. Under a labor income tax, a household can enjoy high consumption yet owe no tax if it finances its consumption out of inheritance, wealth, or capital income. Most citizens would therefore regard a consumption tax as fairer than a labor income tax. # Second, capital accumulation: Under a consumption tax, a person pays tax throughout his life, including retirement. Under a labor income tax, a person pays tax only until retirement. To raise the same revenue, a labor income tax must therefore raise more revenue from a person during the work stage of life than a consumption tax does because the labor income tax will raise no revenue from the person once the person retires. A consumption tax postpones more of a person’s lifetime tax to later in life than a labor income tax does. Under the labor income tax, the higher tax in the work stage of life reduces a worker’s ability to save. With a labor income tax, therefore, a worker accumulates less capital during the work stage. Because worker saving finances investment in real capital, there will be less accumulation of capital in the economy. # WHICH TAX IS FAIREST? Let’s consider ways to think about fairness: (1) regressivity, (2) taxing what you take versus taxing what you make, and (3) the grasshopper and the ants. # Regressivity We have seen that a consumption tax with a single rate (e.g., a retail sales tax or value-added tax) is regressive: As we move from low- to high-income households, the ratio of consumption to income falls so the ratio of tax to income falls. If a citizen regards regressivity as fair, then that citizen should regard a single-rate consumption tax as fairer than a progressive income tax. Conversely, if a citizen regards regressivity as unfair, then that citizen should judge a progressive income tax as fairer than a single-rate consumption tax. We have also seen that this regressivity can be offset by giving each household an appropriately scaled cash rebate, so that consumption tax plus rebate is not regressive. Also, we have seen that an annual household consumption tax can use graduated rates (like the current income tax) and therefore be made progressive. Thus, a citizen who regards regressivity as unfair should realize that it is possible to offset the regressivity of a consumption tax and even to make a consumption tax progressive. # Taxing What You Take versus Taxing What You Make A consumption tax burdens a household according to what it takes out of the economic “pie” for its own enjoyment, thereby subtracting what is left for others to consume or businesses to invest. By contrast, an income tax burdens a household according to what it “makes.” According to standard economic theory, what a household earns usually reflects what it makes—its marginal product. A consumption tax advocate argues that it is fairer to tax a household according to what it enjoys rather than what it produces.