\# Chapter 3 Public Goods and Political Economy # Case Study A Global Public Good: Military Protection of a Valuable World Resource Oil is a valuable resource on which many economies around the world currently depend. If a hostile dictator were to gain control of enough of the world’s oil to significantly manipulate its price or disrupt its supply, that dictator could harm the standard of living for ordinary people in many countries. Military protection to prevent a valuable world resource like oil from the control, manipulation, and disruption by a hostile dictator is a global public good: Each nation would benefit from such protection whether or not it had paid for the protection. Thus, there is a potential free-rider problem: Each nation may wait for others to provide and pay for such military protection; but if all nations wait, such military protection will not be forthcoming. However, it is possible that the benefit of military protection to a single large nation dependent on oil would be great enough to cover the entire cost of protection; if so, that nation would be willing to provide the military protection by itself if necessary. Such was apparently the case for the United States in August 1990 when Iraq’s dictator Saddam Hussein suddenly moved his Iraqi army into Kuwait, taking control of its oil fields. Kuwait is a small, oil-rich country that borders Saudi Arabia. Whether Saddam Hussein wanted to move the Iraqi army into Saudi Arabia can of course be debated. President George H. W. Bush made it clear that the United States would be willing, if necessary, to pay the entire cost of defending the oil fields of Saudi Arabia from Saddam Hussein’s army and forcing his withdrawal from Kuwait. The Bush administration judged that the United States’ marginal benefit from defending the Saudi and Kuwaiti oil fields—from which the United States gets an important fraction of its oil—would exceed the entire cost. The United States immediately poured troops into Saudi Arabia, making it clear the United States was ready to fight, alone if necessary, to protect Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Of course, other nations—Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Western European countries, Japan, and so forth—also had substantial marginal benefits for the defense of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. During the fall of 1990, the Bush administration worked diplomatically to gain support from other nations—either to contribute troops or commit to help pay for a military intervention to drive the Iraqi army out of Kuwait. In January 1991, after months of warning Saddam Hussein to withdraw, the United States (with military support from several other nations and political support from the majority of countries) attacked the Iraqi army in Kuwait, defeated it in less than a month, and forced it to withdraw from Kuwait. President Bush made the decision not to pursue the Iraqi army once it had withdrawn from Kuwait—specifically, not to attempt a military assault on Baghdad or try to remove Saddam Hussein from power. Following the success of the military operation, the United States was able to secure substantial financial reimbursement from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Japan, Germany, and other nations—these nations chose not to be free riders—so that the United States ended up bearing only a fraction of the cost. By contrast, in 2003 President George W. Bush was unable to secure either troop or financial contributions from this set of countries (the United States did obtain support from Britain and several other countries) to invade Iraq, secure its capital Baghdad, and remove Saddam Hussein from power. As a consequence, the United States has ended up bearing most of the cost of the military invasion and pacification of Iraq from spring 2003 to the present. Why the difference? It is possible that these other nations wanted a U.S. military invasion to remove Saddam Hussein from power, but they chose to be free riders. However, it is also possible that these nations felt the benefit from an invasion and pacification of Iraq was not worth its cost. In 1990, Saddam Hussein had moved his army into Kuwait, and the announced purpose of the Bush administration was to lead a coalition to drive the Iraqi army out of Kuwait but not to invade Baghdad and remove Saddam Hussein from power. In 2003, the announced purpose of the Bush administration was to dismantle the weapons-of-mass-destruction program that it believed Saddam Hussein was pursuing and to remove him from power. The nations that were unwilling to contribute may have judged the benefit to be less than its cost, and their unwillingness to contribute financially may have been due to this judgment rather than free riding.