\# 54 Public Finance expansion of the supply of permits that would continue until the market price is brought back down to the ceiling price. # The Political Challenge Developing, maintaining, and implementing such a treaty—whether it uses a tax or tradable permits—would be politically challenging. Obviously low-income countries would want to maximize revenue transfers while high-income countries would want to minimize transfers. An agreement would have to be reached concerning the voting mechanism among treaty participants that would be used to decide the tax and the formula for transferring income or the total number of permits and the formula for distributing permits to countries. In order to try to win a favorable modification of the formula, some countries might claim they were considering withdrawing from the treaty, so there would always be the risk of country withdrawals. However, it should be recognized that similar problems occur under most international treaties. Instead of a carbon tax or tradable permits, an international treaty was negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997 under which each high-income country was assigned a specific numerical emissions target, and low-income countries were exempt. The method of achieving its target was left to each high-income country. Note the differences between the carbon tax or tradable permits described above and the Kyoto treaty. With the tax or tradable permits, there are no emission targets for individual countries; instead the tax is set with the aim of inducing a target total world emissions, or there is an emissions target for the world that sets the total number of permits to be distributed. With the tax or permits, each carbon emitter in each country has an incentive to reduce its own emissions until its marginal abatement cost (MAC) equals the tax or permit price; because the tax or permit price is the same for all firms in all countries, MACs would end up equal among all emitters, thereby achieving the reduction in world carbon emissions at minimum cost. With Kyoto, MACs will not be equalized, so emission reduction will not be achieved at minimum cost. Although many high-income countries have ratified the Kyoto treaty, the United States has not, and low-income countries such as China are exempt from the treaty. Thus, the two largest carbon emitters, the United States and China, are not restrained by the treaty. # Summary Economic analysis has reached several important conclusions. The right tax—a tax equal to the marginal damage to the environment—gets the market to generate the right quantity of a polluting good. Pollution tax revenue should be used to cut other taxes or send households cash transfers. Whenever feasible, the tax should be levied per emission, not per unit of the polluting good. A tax per emission that is the same for all emitters of pollutant X minimizes the cost of abating the pollution. Tradable permits are an alternative way to charge polluters a price in order to discourage pollution. There are pros and cons to tradable permits versus pollution taxes: With tradable permits, the quantity of emissions is certain, but the cost to the economy of abatement is not limited; with a tax, the quantity of emissions is uncertain, but the cost to the economy of abatement is limited. It is better for the government to sell, rather than give, permits to polluters, because then the revenue can be used to cut other taxes; even when permits are given, the price that evolves as permits are traded among polluters tends to minimize the cost of reducing pollution in the short run though not the long run.