\# 196 Public Finance Starting from 100 units (the quantity of the good resulting from the tax), the amount a consumer would willing to pay for another unit—the consumer’s marginal benefit (MB)—is $20, while the marginal cost (MC) of producing the unit is $16. If the 101st unit is produced, hypothetically it would be possible to take $20 from the consumer for that unit so his utility stays constant, give $16 to the producers so their utility stays constant, and distribute the $4 surplus to other people making them better off; hence, the net gain in welfare from the 101st unit would be $4. Then do the same thing for the 102nd unit, distributing the surplus which is now slightly less than $4 to other people; and so on for additional units as long as the MB is still greater than the MC, stopping at intersection point D (110 units), where the MB equals the MC so that there would be no surplus to distribute on an additional unit. During this hypothetical process, consumers would be compensated so that their utility would stay constant. Thus, the MB curve used to draw the BAD triangle that measures the efficiency loss from the tax on a good is a curve along which the utility of consumers remains constant. The MB curve looks like a demand curve, but utility does not stay constant along an ordinary demand curve. An ordinary demand curve shows how a consumer’s demand increases as the price falls—but as the consumer “slides down” an ordinary demand curve, the consumer’s utility increases. To keep the consumer’s utility constant as the price falls, we must compensate for the price cut by taking away just enough income from the consumer, so that his utility stays constant despite the price cut. This decrease in income would cause the consumer to demand less of the good (assuming it is a normal good). This curve, which is therefore steeper than the ordinary demand curve, is called the compensated demand curve. Along the compensated demand curve, the consumer’s utility stays constant. Thus it is the compensated demand curve (not the ordinary demand curve) that should be used to construct the BAD triangle that measures the efficiency loss from the tax. # THE EFFICIENCY LOSS FROM A TAX ON LABOR INCOME In the discussion of Figure 7.9 it was noted in a footnote that the S curve in the diagram used to construct the BAD triangle is the compensated supply curve, not the ordinary supply curve. Here we explain why. Recall that in Figure 7.9 there were 10 workers in the market, each supplying 2,000 hours in response to an after-tax wage of $12, for a total supply of 20,000 hours. Starting from 20,000 hours—the quantity resulting from the tax—the amount a worker would need to be paid to be willing to work the 20,001st hour is $12, while the marginal revenue product of an hour of labor (MRPL) is $16. If the 20,001st hour is worked, it would be possible to compensate the worker $12, so that the worker’s utility stays constant, and then distribute the $4 surplus product to other people making them better off; hence, the net gain in welfare from the 20,001st hour would be $4. Then do the same thing for the 20,002nd hour, distributing the surplus which is now slightly less than $4 to other people; and so on, stopping at intersection point D (22,000 hours). During this hypothetical process, workers would be compensated so that their utility would stay constant. Thus, the curve we need to construct the BAD triangle is a curve along which the utility of workers remains constant. The curve looks like a supply curve, but utility does not stay constant along an ordinary supply curve. An ordinary supply curve shows how a worker’s labor supply increases as the after-tax wage rises—but as the worker “climbs up” an ordinary supply curve, the worker’s utility increases. To keep the worker’s utility constant as the after-tax wage rises, we must compensate for the wage increase by taking away just enough income from the worker so that the worker’s utility stays constant despite the