\# Current Research # Optimal Protection against Crime Protection against crime is a public good: If the quantity of protection is increased—for example, through additional police officers—every law-abiding citizen benefits, and none can be excluded from benefiting. Figure 3.1 applies to protection against crime: The socially optimal protection against crime is the quantity at which the MB curve intersects the MC curve. But in practice, how can MB be estimated so that it can be compared to MC? An empirical application is given by economists Philip Cook and Jens Ludwig in their book on gun violence.\* Protection against gun violence is a public good, so optimal protection is the quantity at which the MB curve intersects the MC curve. Cook and Ludwig estimate MB by employing a method widely used by economists to determine the optimal quantity: a survey of willingness to pay (this method is called contingent valuation). They use data from a nationally representative phone survey of about 1,200 adults in fall 1998 conducted by the National Opinion Research Center of the University of Chicago; their dollar estimates are for 1998. The respondents were asked whether they would vote for or against a program that would reduce criminal gun violence by 30% but raise their taxes by $X ($X was $50, $100, or $200); the respondents were told that the program “would reduce gun thefts and illegal gun dealers and make it more difficult for criminals and delinquents to obtain guns.” From the survey answers, Cook and Ludwig estimate that in 1998, the average American household would have been willing to pay about $200 to reduce criminal gun violence, implying that the American public of roughly 100 million households would have been willing to pay about $20 billion in total. Extrapolating, Cook and Ludwig estimate that the American public would have been willing to pay about $80 billion in 1998 to virtually eliminate criminal gun violence. Thus, the Cook and Ludwig study provides evidence and estimates concerning the public’s willingness to pay for only one particular method of reducing gun violence. Of course, how much a household is willing to pay to reduce gun violence might depend on the method used to reduce it. The wording of the question suggested that the method would involve increasing the supervision and monitoring of the sale and possession of guns. An alternative method for reducing gun violence would be to increase the number of police officers patrolling the streets. \*Philip Cook and Jens Ludwig, *Gun Violence: The Real Costs* (Oxford University Press, 2000). # Appendixes Several chapters contain appendixes for further exploration, allowing a professor to customize the course to fit time constraints and the varying competencies of students. # Core and Special Interest Chapters A concise course does not mean that professors cannot teach the interesting topics. Public Finance contains all of the necessary core materials and tools that are integral to any public finance course. Seidman also includes interesting topics like environmental pollution, Social Security, health insurance, and education.