\# Public Finance where tS is the tentative tax and tP is the tax credit. This is called the credit-invoice method. Of course t(S P) tS tP, so the two methods give the same result. However, the two methods differ in appearance. The subtraction method makes the VAT appear similar to a corporate income tax, which also involves a subtraction from sales revenue before applying a tax rate. With the corporate income tax, the cost of goods sold (labor compensation, etc.) is subtracted from revenue. With the VAT, purchase from other firms is subtracted from revenue. If a country were considering replacing its corporate income tax with a VAT, it might seem natural to institute a subtraction-method VAT. # A Subtraction VAT Several steps would be required to convert a corporate income tax to a subtraction VAT. Recall from Chapter 8 how a corporation determines its income tax. Business income (profit) equals sales revenue minus the cost of goods sold this year. Cost of goods sold this year includes compensation to employees, expense on materials (intermediate product) used up making the final product, interest paid to creditors, and the depreciation (wearing out) of investment goods. The corporate tax rate is then applied to this income. Similarly, with a VAT, sales revenue is added and expense on materials is subtracted, but to convert the corporate income tax to a subtraction VAT, these changes must be made: No subtraction is permitted for compensation to employees, interest to creditors, or depreciation of investment goods; but a subtraction is permitted for the purchase of investment goods this year. The VAT rate is then applied to this tax base. The credit-invoice method makes the VAT appear similar to a sales tax because its first step is to apply a tax rate to sales revenue to obtain tS (after computing its tentative tax tS, the firm is allowed to reduce its tax by taking a tax credit equal to tP). If a country initially taxed all firms (not just retailers) on their sales—such a sales tax is called a turnover tax—it might seem natural to institute a credit-invoice VAT. Several decades ago many European countries had a turnover tax, and they found it natural to replace their turnover tax with a credit-invoice VAT. The credit-invoice method is used by many more countries than the subtraction method.1 # COMPARING A VAT TO A RST Compare the 10% VAT to a 10% retail sales tax. Under the 10% RST, no tax would be paid by the farmer or the miller, but the baker would pay a tax of $10 on his sales of $100. In both cases, $10 of tax would be built into the price that the consumer pays. With the VAT, the $10 is built in stages—$3 from the farmer, $4 from the miller, and $3 from the baker. With the RST, the $10 tax enters in the final stage from the baker. In both cases, the bread comes to the consumer with $10 of tax built into its price. The effect on the consumer would be the same. Under a retail sales tax, an investment good (e.g., a machine) sold to a business firm is not taxed. A VAT would not tax an investment good sold to a business firm. True, a VAT would be levied on the early stages of production of an investment good. However, the business firm that buys the investment good would reduce the total VAT it owes by purchasing the good; increasing tP reduces T in either formula above, thereby undoing the tax burden. 1 The two methods also differ in administration. Advocates of the subtraction method contend it is easier to administer. Advocates of the credit-invoice method contend it reduces tax evasion because auditors can cross-check buyer and seller by using the invoice.