\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment # APPLICATIONS: ACID RAIN AND GLOBAL WARMING # Tradable Permits for Sulfur Dioxide to Reduce Acid Rain When coal containing sulfur is burned to generate electricity, sulfur dioxide is produced. If sulfur dioxide is emitted into the air, acid rain forms and falls to earth with harmful effects. Sulfur dioxide pollution can be cut by reducing the production of electricity or by reducing the quantity of sulfur dioxide that gets emitted per unit of electricity produced. The utilities can use low-sulfur coal instead of high-sulfur coal or install a scrubber to capture most of the sulfur dioxide so that it is not emitted into the air. They can also switch to another fuel that contains no sulfur. The aim of environmental policy should be to achieve a given reduction in sulfur dioxide pollution at minimum cost. To minimize cost, firms potentially emitting sulfur dioxide should be confronted with the same price per emission. The price can be implemented by levying a tax or selling tradable permits. Before 1990, the price strategy was not used in the United States for sulfur dioxide. Using the traditional command and control approach, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the early 1970s established a maximum sulfur dioxide emissions rate for every new coal-burning generator of electricity. That meant that every new plant could not emit more than a specific number of pounds of sulfur dioxide per million BTUs of fuel burned; but the more fuel it burned, the more it could emit. No incentive was given for reducing emissions per se. Applying the regulations only to new plants gave polluters a perverse incentive to keep using old “dirty” plants as long as possible. The path-breaking Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, however, authorized the gradual phasing in of a national program of tradable permits for sulfur dioxide by electric utilities to begin after a five-year delay for preparation. Tradable permits (allowances) are given (according to a formula), not sold, to electric power plants. Each plant is given a number of permits roughly proportional to its past use of fuel. Plants can then buy or sell permits. Each permit allows a plant to emit one ton of sulfur dioxide. Any plant emitting more tons (whether from old or new plants) than its permits allow is punished with a stiff fine ($2,000 per ton in the initial year, currently larger because it is indexed to inflation). Each year, permits are given to plants to cover emissions that year or in a future year (so permits can be “banked” for future use). The number of permits given out has declined gradually each year in order to gradually reduce total pollution. Each electric power plant is required to continuously measure and record its emissions. The EPA monitors permit trading and emissions and levies fines for excess emissions. Under the program, total emissions have fallen, permit prices have turned out to be lower than expected, trading costs have been low, there has been little delay from litigation, and it is estimated that there has been a substantial reduction in the total cost of achieving pollution reduction as permits have been traded from plants with low abatement costs to plants with high abatement costs. At times, however, there have been erratic fluctuations in permit prices. A market mechanism does not prevent mistakes, but it does generate quick adaptation to new information. Initially, many electric utility firms evidently expected a higher permit price and, as a consequence, placed orders for scrubbers that cost a bit less than the expected high price. But when the permit price turned out to be low because of the unexpected availability at moderate cost of low-sulfur coal from the Powder River Basin in Wyoming, some utility firms regretted their purchase of scrubbers, but others were able to cancel their order for scrubbers and switch from high-sulfur to low-sulfur coal—a more cost-effective response.