\# Public Finance But this raises difficult questions. How would public funds be allocated? Would funds go only to the two major parties? Does it violate freedom of expression if individuals are prohibited from spending their own money to express their views on political issues and support particular candidates? The influence of special interests works through another channel. Elected government officials—legislators and executives—and their staffs may plan to leave government eventually and return to the private sector. They may want to obtain jobs with private firms that are currently lobbying them because of their position in government. If they respond favorably to the lobbying today, they may have a greater chance of being offered a job tomorrow. This is known as the revolving door problem. Thus far we have described possible abuse initiated by the private sector. Abuse may also be initiated by the public sector. Government bureaucrats who administer bureaus—government departments in charge of particular programs—have an incentive to expand their programs and operations because expansion brings more pay, power, and prestige. They therefore have an interest in enlisting the support of private sector organizations to lobby legislators to expand their programs. They may be tempted to promise special treatment for private sector groups that help them win expansion. Rather than being dispassionate neutral players, bureaucrats may well be a dedicated and effective force for expanding government.1 The interaction of special interests in the private sector and in government bureaucracies creates prospects for corruption—that is, illegal and unethical behavior that sacrifices the public interest for personal gain. Private special interests may pay (bribe) government officials—directly (with cash) or indirectly (with gifts or a job upon leaving government)—to favor them in legislation or in regulation. Government bureaucrats may reward private organizations that help them expand their bureaus and programs, or they may make life difficult for private firms under their regulation unless these firms support their expansion or make payoffs to them. # Public Choice, Government Failure, and Constitutions The public choice school of economists has argued that legislators, executives, and government bureaucrats are generally biased toward expanding government beyond what is best for the public.2 According to this perspective, it is naive to assume that “government” is a neutral and benevolent servant of the public. On the contrary, legislators, executives, and bureaucrats have an incentive and, unless restrained by a constitution, the power to enact and implement laws and regulations that inflate government and do more harm than good—that is, a tendency to government failure is the rule, not the exception. Public choice economists argue that legislators, executives, and bureaucrats need to be restrained by a constitution that limits their power to expand government and do harm. For example, the constitution should contain provisions such as a limit on the percentage of GDP that a government can spend, a requirement that the budget be balanced, and a limit on how many terms an elected official can serve. Although most economists accept the basic point that government, like markets, may fail, many question the specific points of the public choice school. They note that pervasive advertising in our society promotes private sector goods, not government programs, so that there may be a bias toward private sector goods. 1 William Niskanen, Bureaucracy and Representative Government. Aldine, 1971. 2 Geoffrey Brennan and James Buchanan, The Power to Tax: The Analytical Foundations of a Fiscal Constitution. Cambridge University Press, 1980.