\# 316 Public Finance The government deficit in year 0 is $50 billion. The deficit is defined as spending minus taxes in a given year. Suppose the government does the same thing in year 1, so its deficit in year 1 is also $50 billion. At the end of year 1, the government debt is $100 billion, because the public holds $100 billion in government bonds ($50 billion bought in year 0 and $50 billion bought in year 1). Thus, the debt at the end of year 1 is the cumulative result of the deficits in years 0 and 1. Hence: The debt is a stock that is measured at a point in time, and the deficit is a flow that occurs during a period of time—one year. Suppose in year 2 the government spends $100 billion and collects $150 billion in taxes, so the government surplus is $50 billion. With the surplus, it buys back $50 billion in bonds from the public, “retiring,” or paying off, $50 billion of its debt. At the end of year 2, government debt is down to $50 billion. Thus, running a deficit causes government debt to increase, and running a surplus causes government debt to decrease. # Commonsense Concern about Excessive Borrowing Let’s begin with a commonsense concern about excessive borrowing for an individual or a business firm and then consider whether it applies to a government. A person who borrows money to spend more than he earns is relying on creditors (i.e., lenders) who will exact a price—interest payments—for their service. It takes self-discipline to limit spending to earnings—borrowing is tempting. However, excessive borrowing today means heavy payments (principal plus interest) to creditors tomorrow. Ultimately it may lead to a day of reckoning: If a time comes when you are unable to make the heavy payments, you will face personal bankruptcy, and your creditors will have the legal right to take your property. Moreover, you will be spurned by creditors in the future, unable to borrow even in an emergency. This warning about excessive borrowing does not mean that all borrowing should be avoided. Borrowing in a genuine emergency is appropriate. Borrowing to finance a long-lived durable such as a house or tuition for education that will raise productivity and earnings is warranted, provided that the interest plus repayments are not large relative to your future earnings. If your income is low today but is sure to be high tomorrow, it makes sense to borrow so that your consumption is “smoother”—that is, stays more even than your income between today and tomorrow. You must keep your debt from becoming large relative to your earnings, so that your interest payments do not absorb too large a percentage of your earnings. This commonsense view applies to a business firm as well. Borrowing to finance a long-lived productive asset, such as a machine, is warranted provided that the additional earnings generated by the machine will be enough to cover interest plus repayments. But excessive business borrowing can lead the business into bankruptcy and the taking of its property by creditors. The same concern applies to a government. Like a business firm, a government is justified in borrowing to finance a long-lived productive asset—such as a highway or a school building. However, a government that borrows in order to spend more than it collects in revenue must rely on creditors who will exact a price—interest payments—for their service. Heavy borrowing today means heavy repayments to creditors tomorrow. There might come a day of reckoning: If the government is unable to make repayments when they come due, it will default and creditors will go unpaid. After a default, the government may find it difficult to borrow because creditors will be wary.