\# 210 Public Finance Suppose you sell the stock for $11,000 on December 31 and deposit the $11,000 in your bank account. The only thing that would change in Table 8.9 is the bottom block; the new bottom block is shown in Table 8.10. Thus, it doesn’t matter whether you sell your stock on December 31 or not: Your income would be $41,000, and you would need to add your capital gain of $1,000 to your wage income ($38,000), interest ($1,000), and dividends ($1,000) to get the correct answer for your income—$41,000. Hence, whether or not you realize your capital gain (i.e., sell your stock for cash), your income is $41,000, and your capital gain of $1,000 is a component of your income. Yet under the U.S. income tax, only realized capital gains are subject to income tax. Tax on an unrealized capital gain is deferred until the stock is sold. Why is tax on an unrealized capital gain deferred? One reason given is that tax must be paid in cash, but an unrealized capital gain doesn’t generate any cash for paying tax. Another reason given is that it is not always possible to know the market value of all corporate stock. # The Taxation of Nominal rather than Real Capital Income Initially suppose the government levies no income tax, there is no inflation, and the interest rate is 4%. A saver who puts $100 in the bank at the beginning of the year would be able to buy 4% more goods at the end of the year, so the real return to saving is 4%. Now suppose inflation is raised permanently to 8% (due to a permanent increase in the growth rate of money by the central bank). If inflation is 8% higher (8% instead of 0%), historical experience shows that eventually the nominal interest rate—the interest rate actually paid—will also be roughly 8% higher (12% instead of 4%), so that the real interest rate (the nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate) will be roughly the same (4%).7 A saver who puts $100 in the bank at the beginning of the year will be able to buy 4% more goods at the end of the year (the saver would need $108 to buy the same goods, so $112 will let the saver buy 4% more goods). With no tax, inflation would not affect the real return to saving—it would remain 4%. Ideally what should be taxed is real (inflation-adjusted) income, not nominal income. Only interest in excess of what is needed to keep up with inflation should be taxed. Whether inflation is 0% or 8%, the saver should be taxed on $4 of real interest income. However, under the current U.S. income tax, the household is taxed on nominal interest income—if inflation is 0%, the household is taxed on $4, but if inflation is 8%, the household is taxed on $12. Table 8.11 shows how this improper taxation of nominal interest income affects the after-tax real return to saving. Assume the tax rate is 25% throughout this example in all three rows of the table. When inflation is high, nominal interest rates are high (this is called the Fisher effect after the economist who observed and explained it nearly a century ago). For example, in the late 1970s inflation was roughly 10% in the United States, and most nominal interest rates were double-digit (above 10%), while today inflation is roughly 3%, and most nominal interest rates are single digit (below 10%). # TABLE 8.10

| Dec. 31 Assets             |         |
| -------------------------- | ------- |
| Bank account               | $25,000 |
| Corporate stock            | $0      |
| Dec. 31 Liabilities (debt) |         |
| $5,000                     |         |
| Dec. 31 Wealth             |         |
| $20,000                    |         |
