\# Public Finance # FIGURE 2.3 The Optimal Tax Equals the Marginal Damage The market will move to the socially optimal quantity if a tax is levied equal to marginal damage. Price

|    |         | $1.00    | $3.50  |
| -- | ------- | -------- | ------ |
|    | S (MPC) |          |        |
|    | H       | K        | D (MB) |
| 80 | 100     | Gasoline |        |

quantity—100 instead of 80. The competitive market gets the quantity of the polluting good wrong because one key component of the marginal social cost—the marginal damage to the environment—is external to the participants in the polluting-good market. No market participant has to pay for the environmental damage being generated, so no participant takes it into account. Hence, there is an externality problem. When a good has a negative externality, the market generates too much of the good. What can be done to reduce the quantity of gasoline from 100 gallons to the socially optimal quantity of 80? Levy the right tax—a tax T equal to the damage per gallon $1.00—as shown in Figure 2.3. The effect of a $1.00 tax per gallon would be to shift up the supply curve by $1.00 because the tax would increase the marginal private cost sellers have to pay by $1.00. With a tax equal to the marginal damage, the new MPC' equals the MSC, and the new supply curve S'(MPC') coincides with the marginal social cost (MSC) curve. The market would therefore move to the intersection of the D curve with the new S' curve, so the quantity of gasoline generated by the market would fall from 100 to 80 gallons. Levying a tax equal to the environmental damage—$1.00 per gallon—internalizes the externality. Previously, the damage gasoline use was inflicting on the environment was external to market participants because they did not have to pay for it. By levying a tax equal to the marginal damage, the government makes the environmental cost internal to the market participants. For this reason, a tax levied to internalize an externality is called a corrective tax. Its purpose is not to raise revenue but to correct the market. It is sometimes called a Pigouvian tax, after the British economist Arthur Pigou who proposed it for this purpose nearly a century ago. If the tax T is set equal to the marginal damage MD, the reduction in the polluting good—gasoline—from 100 to 80 gallons—confers a net benefit on society. It is useful to divide this net benefit into two parts, which can be seen in Figure 2.4. The first part is the gross benefit from the reduction in environmental damage; each unit that is cut avoids a marginal damage of $1.00, the vertical distance MD between the MSC curve and the MPC curve. Adding up the gross benefit over all units cut gives the area HIJK; the area of HIJK equals $1.00 × 20 = $20.