\# Public Finance to 20%, and the VAT provides an important share of their tax revenue. It is not imme- diately obvious that a VAT is a consumption tax, but we will see shortly that economic analysis leads to the conclusion that a VAT is a consumption tax. Although both the RST and the VAT are general consumption taxes, in practice each tax exempts many services and often exempts certain categories of goods, such as food or medicine. There are also consumption taxes on particular goods, such as gasoline, alcohol, and tobacco, with the rationale of either discouraging pollution, paying for trans- portation infrastructure, or discouraging unhealthful consumption. It would be possible to levy a tax on the annual consumption of a household; each household would compute its consumption by subtracting its saving from its income (such a tax has yet to be enacted and implemented). This chapter examines and analyzes various consumption taxes. The U.S. federal government does not levy either a retail sales tax or a value-added tax. Both the RST and the VAT have been proposed for the U.S. federal government, and the pros and cons of enacting one of these taxes will be seriously considered and debated in the coming years. In the United States, most state governments and some local governments levy a retail sales tax. # A RETAIL SALES TAX A retail sales tax (RST) is a percentage tax on the sale of consumer goods by retail- ers. In principle, investment goods are supposed to be exempt from the tax, so that the retail sales tax is a consumption tax. In practice, it is sometimes difficult to avoid taxing some investment goods. For example, suppose the sale of a personal computer is subject to the retail sales tax. This is appropriate if it is used by a household for non- business purposes, because such use can be considered consumption. But if it is used by a business, then it is really an investment good that is contributing to the production of output by the business. The tax is levied on business firms—retailers. As we know from Chapter 7, if we assume that demand is inelastic relative to supply, most of the burden falls on the consumers through higher prices. In fact, most consumers probably assume that they are bearing the whole burden, because the tax is shown separately at the cash regis- ter. When a consumer buys an item with a sticker price of $100 in a state with a 6% retail sales tax, at the cash register a $6 tax is added and shown on the receipt, and the consumer must pay $106 to buy the good. Recall from Chapter 7 that the consumer is bearing the whole burden if the price would have been $100 in the absence of a retail sales tax; but it is possible that without the tax, the price would have been, say, $101; if so, then the consumer’s burden is $5 and the retailer’s burden is $1. When economists call the retail sales tax a consumption tax, they are assuming, quite plausibly, that most of the burden falls on consumers rather than on retailers. Given the assumption that most of the burden of a retail sales tax falls on consum- ers, a retail sales tax is regressive with respect to income: As we move from low- to high-income households in a given year, the ratio of tax burden to income generally falls. The reason is that as we move from low- to high-income households, the ratio of household consumption to household income generally falls, because higher-income people usually save a larger fraction of their income than low-income people do.

| Income Household | Tax/Income Ratio | Consumption/Income Ratio |
| ---------------- | ---------------- | ------------------------ |
| $20,000          | 20%              | $16,000/$20,000 (80%)    |
| $100,000         | 15%              | $60,000/$100,000 (60%)   |
