\# Chapter 11 Education limited income and financial assets—the limits must be documented when applying for the loans. Even low interest rates may not be enough to encourage economically efficient borrowing for higher education. Consider a student from a nonaffluent family deciding whether to incur a large debt in order to attend vocational training, college, or a graduate program. Incurring large debt is risky. Under a standard loan, the student will be obligated to make fixed monthly payments regardless of future earnings. If the investment in education pays off well and the student’s income rises more than the loan repayments, the loan will have been financially beneficial. But if the investment pays off poorly and the student’s income rises less than the loan repayments, borrowing for education will turn out to have been a serious financial mistake. Risk-averse individuals might hesitate to pursue more education even if the payoff, on average, would cover the loan repayments. Yet it is economically efficient for individuals to borrow to pursue more education when payoffs, on average, exceed the costs of loans. One way to overcome this hesitation would be to offer loans with income-related repayments; the required repayment would vary with the income that the borrower actually earns after graduation. With this kind of loan, risk would be shifted from the student borrower to the lender. Government would be able to adjust required repayments by using income tax returns. # Financial Aid For several decades, the federal government has given grants to students from low-income families (Pell grants or work-study grants that require some on-campus work by students); applicants must document family income and assets. For the past decade, assistance has been given to middle-class families through income tax credits (HOPE and lifetime learning tax credits) and income tax deductions for interest payments on student loans and expenses for higher education. The tax credits and deductions, however, do not help low-income families that owe little or no federal income tax. Assistance could be extended to low-income families by using a refundable tax credit. In fact, it might be desirable to channel all federal financial aid through a single refundable tax credit. Like other families, low-income families would annually file a federal income tax return and claim the refundable tax credit to reimburse a portion of college tuition. For example, a low-income family that owes no income tax would receive a check from the U.S. Treasury to partially reimburse tuition expenses. The credit would be highest for low-income families and phased down as income rises. For a further discussion, see the box “College Grants on a Postcard.” # Summary Schools provide a set of distinct services. Schools impart skills, knowledge, and human capital; teach students a work ethic, how to learn, and how to enjoy learning; screen and sort students for employers; teach citizenship; and reduce the number of criminals. Benefits to others imply a positive externality which may justify a subsidy. Most children in the United States obtain elementary and secondary education in public schools. If government played no role, private schools would compete for students; high-income students would attend high-quality, high-tuition schools, and low-income students would attend low-quality, low-tuition schools. This inequality could be reduced if government provided tuition vouchers that were higher for low-income than for high-income children. A system of private schools with variable vouchers would still have certain problems that arise from selective admissions. Public schools remove these selective admissions problems within the school district by guaranteeing