\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance Recall the analysis of individually purchased insurance from the beginning of this chapter. We saw that in a competitive insurance market—even without the problem of adverse selection—each household would be charged a premium equal to its expected medical cost, so households with low income and high expected medical costs would be unable to afford insurance. With adverse selection driving premiums still higher (because high-cost households buy insurance, while many low-cost households do not), the number of uninsured households would be even larger. A system of employment-provided health insurance has several appealing features. A high-cost household is charged (through a reduction in its cash salary) the same amount as a low-cost household; adverse selection is less of a problem (low-cost people seek employment and are then automatically assigned insurance coverage); and insurance comes automatically with the job rather than having to be obtained by searching the individual market. An employment-based insurance system almost certainly results in a smaller number of uninsured people than a system based entirely on individually purchased insurance. However, a system of employment-provided insurance also has serious shortcomings. Retirees are usually not covered by this system (though some employers continue to buy coverage for former employees who have retired). Unemployed people are usually not covered (though some employers buy coverage for former employees who have been laid off). Businesses with primarily low-wage workers often provide no coverage because employees cannot afford the corresponding cuts in cash wages that employers would require to afford the insurance. Workers in families with a health problem often experience job lock—they are afraid to switch to a more productive job or risk a period of unemployment while they search for such a job because their new insurance policy may refuse to cover preexisting health conditions. # Medicaid and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program Poor people cannot afford medical care without help. The main government program for helping poor people (whether young or old) pay for medical care is Medicaid, enacted in 1965, the same year as the Medicare program for retirees. Since 1997, Medicaid has been supplemented by another government program, the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP, pronounced s-chip), which extends coverage to children in near-poor families. In contrast to Medicare, which is run by the federal government, Medicaid and SCHIP are federally mandated but administered by the state governments. They are financed by a combination of federal and state general revenues (not a payroll tax); the federal government bears more of the cost for low-income states than high-income states. Medicaid and SCHIP are not government-provided medical care. The medical care is provided by private sector hospitals and doctors, and Medicaid and SCHIP pay the hospitals and doctors for treating low-income people. The prices that hospitals and doctors can charge are regulated, and there is little or no patient cost sharing. To qualify for Medicaid or SCHIP, a person must meet both an income and an assets test: Income must be sufficiently low, and assets (resources) must also be sufficiently low; the exact dollar number varies across states. Medicaid also assists many retirees who earned substantial income earlier in life but who became poor in old age because of large financial burdens from medical problems and the cost of a nursing home. Once people have used up most of their savings paying for these costs and have therefore become poor, they qualify for Medicaid. Hence, Medicaid pays the fees of nursing homes for many elderly people who were not poor when they were younger (Medicare does not pay nursing home fees). For these elderly, Medicaid also pays the patient cost sharing that Medicare imposes for hospitals,