\# Public Finance Once again, imagine you’re running an insurance company. You can sell insurance person by person, enrolling one person (or family) at a time, or you can go to an employer and, in a single deal with that employer, enroll a hundred employees. Obviously, you’ll enjoy a huge cost saving by enrolling a hundred people in a single transaction, but of course, you give up something as well. You’ll have to agree to enroll all employees without asking individual health questions. Why would an employer want to provide health insurance? First, because there is an important tax advantage. If an employer pays an employee cash wages, both the employer and employee owe payroll taxes, and the employee owes income tax. For example, on $10,000 of wages, the employer must withhold 7.65%, or $765, for the employee’s payroll tax and also pay an employer’s payroll tax of $765. If the employee is in a 15% income tax bracket, the employee will owe $1,500 of income tax (and roughly this amount will be withheld from her paycheck by the employer). By contrast, if the employer instead buys the employee health insurance for $10,000, then no tax is owed—either payroll or income tax. This tax advantage has been part of U.S. tax law for more than half a century and has surely stimulated the spread of employer-provided health insurance. It has also encouraged the spread of insurance with high premiums but low patient cost-sharing and discouraged the spread of catastrophic insurance—insurance with low premiums but high patient cost sharing for normal medical bills. Even without the tax advantage, there is a second reason many employers would probably want to offer health insurance: Many employees like getting their health insurance taken care of at their workplace. Why? Because if a person buys insurance individually, she will usually have to write a large check to pay the premium. If the employer takes care of insurance, the person usually does not know or feel its cost. Hence, an employer who offers health insurance coverage is more attractive to many potential employees. Of course, an employer who buys health insurance won’t be able to pay as much in wages and salaries. However, employers get a group discount (insurers, like other firms, give group discounts for buying in bulk because the sales cost per unit sold is lower), so it is still a good deal for most employees to have their employer buy the insurance rather than buying it on their own. Many employees rightly prefer a compensation package with health insurance. Workplace health insurance is especially attractive to employees having a health problem and who would be charged a high premium (or possibly rejected) if they had to buy insurance on their own. Even healthy individuals must pay a premium that covers the high cost of selling insurance to individuals one by one. Finally, the employer’s benefit office provides the useful service of investigating alternative insurance companies, scrutinizing plan options, and selecting a small number of plans. # Who Bears the Burden of Employer-Provided Health Insurance? It is likely that workers, not employers, end up bearing the burden of employer-provided health insurance. This section explains why. Suppose initially that employers don’t provide health insurance and the cash salary of a worker is $50,000, as shown in Figure 6.4. The demand curve for labor depends on the worker’s marginal revenue product—the additional revenue that the worker will generate for the firm. The higher the worker’s marginal revenue product, the more the employer is willing to pay to employ the worker. If the 100th worker’s annual marginal revenue product is $50,000, the most that the employer will pay the worker is $50,000. The height of the D curve indicates the maximum amount the employer is willing to pay for each worker.