\# 12 Public Finance Economists who favor government intervention for old age insurance differ over which kind of intervention would be best. One option is for the government to operate a Social Security program in which workers and employers pay enough payroll taxes each year to finance benefits promised to current retirees based on their wage histories. A second option would be for the government to require workers to save and invest a specific percentage of their earnings in a private retirement fund of their choice. Under this option, government might require workers to have a large percentage of their retirement fund invested in safe assets like U.S. Treasury bonds and to buy old age insurance—an annuity—either from a private company or perhaps from the government upon retirement. Government might supplement the saving of low-income workers to make sure they accumulate enough to buy an adequate annuity when they retire. Several other options for government intervention are also available. All this is discussed in Chapter 5. # Health Insurance Economists who believe that health insurance should be left to the market contend that individuals should be free to choose a job that offers health insurance, or buy health insurance from a private insurance company, or decide to go without health insurance. Hospitals should be required to provide life-saving emergency medical care to uninsured people, but the uninsured should then be required to pay as much of their hospital bill as possible. The prospect of such payments would provide an incentive for individuals to obtain health insurance. Economists who favor government intervention for health insurance believe it is unrealistic to expect everyone to obtain adequate health insurance. True, some people who don’t obtain adequate insurance chose to spend lavishly on other things rather than buying insurance; these lavish spenders do not deserve financial help (although most citizens believe the children of lavish spenders should get necessary medical care). Some people may have been much too confident about not needing medical care; perhaps they deserve to be taught a lesson. However, many would be inadequately insured through no fault of their own. Some may have been unable to obtain a job that provided adequate health insurance and when they tried to buy insurance, found that they could not obtain it or could do so only at a very high premium. Why couldn’t they buy insurance at a reasonable premium? Their family might have a member suffering from a chronic costly medical problem, and private insurers often either reject an application for insurance from a high-cost family or set the premium very high to cover the high expected cost. Even a family without a chronic costly medical problem might have difficulty affording health insurance if its income is low—after all, premiums are high because medical costs are high—and the family’s income may be low due to low economic aptitude, not laziness. True, even a low-income family (provided it’s healthy) may be able to find insurance with an affordable premium if it is willing to pay the first several thousand dollars (the deductible) of medical care before the insurance kicks in; but then this low-income family may have trouble affording the first several thousand dollars of medical care. Some economists who favor government intervention for health insurance believe that medical care generates a positive externality that warrants a subsidy to sick patients. They contend that when sick people get medical care, other people benefit for two different reasons: first, they may be less likely to catch a contagious disease; second, they may feel better knowing that sick people are getting the medical care they need but cannot afford on their own. If this positive externality is significant, then a significant subsidy to sick patients to help them pay for medical care is socially.