\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency # FIGURE 7.6 The Impact on Workers of Taxing Savers The tax on savers reduces the wage. The labor demand curve shifts down as shown in Figure 7.6. As a consequence, the wage will fall. Thus, perhaps surprisingly, workers bear some burden from a capital income tax. # The Impact of a Progressive Wage Tax on the Low-Skilled Wage Consider an economy with two kinds of labor—low-skilled and high-skilled. The demand for labor reflects the productivity of each kind of labor, so the demand curve for high-skilled labor is higher than the demand curve for low-skilled labor. Initially assume that there are no taxes and there is the same number of workers of each skill level. Figure 7.7(a) shows that the wage for high-skilled labor is $30, and Figure 7.7(b) shows that the wage for low-skilled labor is $10. Consider a progressive wage tax that levies a tax on a worker equal to X% of his wage in excess of $20. At first glance, it might seem that low-skilled workers with a wage of $10 would be unaffected because they are exempt from paying the tax. However, general equilibrium analysis shows that low-skilled workers will bear some burden due to this tax. Why? In the high-skilled labor market shown in Figure 7.7(a), the progressive wage tax shifts up the supply curve of labor just as it did in Figure 7.3(a); this moves the market from point O to point F, thereby reducing the quantity of high-skilled labor. The before-tax wage will rise above $30, but the after-tax wage will fall below $30, so high-skilled workers, not surprisingly, bear some burden from the progressive wage tax. In the low-skilled labor market shown in Figure 7.7(b), the demand curve will shift down and the supply curve will shift right, moving the market from point O to point G, thereby reducing the wage of low-skilled labor. Why will the demand curve shift down? The decrease in the quantity of high-skilled labor will reduce the productivity of low-skilled workers (assuming high-skilled and low-skilled workers are complements in the production process) and shift down the labor demand curve. Why will the supply curve shift right? When fewer workers choose to become high-skilled because of the lower after-tax wage received by high-skilled labor, more workers remain low-skilled. As a consequence of both shifts, the low-skilled wage will fall.