\# Chapter 13 Government Borrowing as the present value of future scheduled benefits minus the present value of future assigned taxes. An example will explain the meaning of present value (also called present discounted value) and why it is used to define fiscal imbalance. Suppose taxes in year 0 (the “present”) are $100,000, and scheduled benefits in year 1 are $110,000. Are the $100,000 of taxes collected in year 0 enough to finance the $110,000 of scheduled benefits in year 1? The answer depends on the interest rate. Suppose the interest rate r = 10%. If $100,000 of taxes are collected in year 0 and saved for one year earning interest of $10,000, then in year 1 there will be $110,000 available to finance the $110,000 of scheduled spending. Equivalently, we can ask: To pay benefits of $110,000 in year 1, how much would we need to collect in taxes in year 0? We define the present value (PV) of $110,000 as $110,000/(1 + r) = $110,000/(1.10) = $100,000. As long as taxes collected in year 0 equal the PV of benefits scheduled in year 1, then the taxes in year 0 will be just enough to pay benefits scheduled in year 1. More generally, as long as the present value of assigned taxes equals the present value of scheduled benefits, taxes will be just enough to pay scheduled benefits. This is why fiscal imbalance is defined as the present value of future scheduled benefits minus the present value of future assigned taxes. Note that the interest rate chosen to compute present value affects the dollar amount of the present value. According to one study, the fiscal imbalance of Social Security and Medicare together is $72 trillion—$62 trillion for Medicare and $10 trillion for Social Security. By contrast, the explicit federal debt held as bonds by the public (domestic and foreign) is about $5 trillion. Thus, the federal government has explicitly scheduled to raise $5 trillion to pay bondholders, but implicitly scheduled to raise $10 trillion to pay beneficiaries of Social Security and $62 trillion to pay beneficiaries of Medicare. Thus, rising Medicare spending is the main source of the federal government’s long-term fiscal imbalance.1 # Generational Accounting Each generation pays taxes and receives benefits from government spending. But some generations may pay more in taxes than they receive in benefits, while others pay less in taxes than they receive in benefits. Generational accounting focuses on how particular generations fare with respect to government taxes and spending. Consider the introduction of Social Security in 1935 and Medicare in 1965. As “pay-as-you-go” programs, payroll taxes were levied on workers, and benefits were paid to retirees. The people who were retired when each program was introduced received benefits even though they had not paid payroll taxes when they were working. Clearly, they gained from the introduction of each program, because the introduction raised the benefits they received without raising the taxes they paid. People who retired a decade after each program was introduced gained almost as much; they paid taxes to the program for only a decade but received benefits for their entire retirement. As time passes, eventually each new generation pays taxes its entire working life before receiving benefits. Conversely, consider the introduction of the first public schools. Adults were taxed to pay for them even though they had not benefited when they were children. Adults who had no children therefore lost from their introduction because it raised their taxes. 1 Jagadeesh Gokhale and Kent Smetters, Fiscal and Generational Imbalances (The AEI Press, 2003); and “Fiscal and Generational Imbalances: An Update,” in Tax Policy and the Economy 20, James Poterba, ed. (MIT Press, 2006), pp. 192–223.