\# Public Finance 6% of GDP over the next half century to cover the rise in Medicare costs (currently federal taxes are roughly 20% of GDP). # How Medicare Works Enacted in 1965, Medicare is health insurance for retirees provided by the federal government. Prior to the enactment of Medicare, many retirees were uninsured because they faced high premiums in the individual market because of their expected high medical costs. The qualifications for receiving Medicare and the method of financing are generally similar to Social Security. For example, 10 years of work are required to earn coverage. Coverage by Medicare begins at age 65 (even if a person starts Social Security at age 62). Part A of Medicare for hospital care is financed by a payroll tax—1.45% on the employer and 1.45% on the employee—and the total of 2.9% is withheld by the employer and sent to the government; the payroll tax applies to the entire wage income of each employee (in contrast to the payroll tax for Social Security which applies only up to a wage ceiling—$102,000 per employee in 2008). Part B of Medicare for physician care is financed 75% by general tax revenues and 25% by monthly premiums paid by retirees; these monthly premiums are collected by reducing the retiree’s monthly Social Security benefit (so some retirees may not even be aware of their monthly premium payment). Medicare requires some patient cost sharing but permits retirees to obtain private insurance to cover this cost sharing (so-called medigap coverage); many low-income retirees qualify for Medicaid, which then pays most or all of their Medicare patient cost sharing. Medicare negotiates or regulates fees that it pays to hospitals and doctors. # Government Insurance for Retirees If there were no Medicare today, consider the situation of a newly retired individual. When the person retires and leaves workplace health insurance, she faces private health insurance companies as an individual. Health insurance firms have a financial incentive to avoid high-cost individuals and attract low-cost individuals. If the individual retiree applies for insurance, the insurance company requires the individual to supply information on medical history. A person expected to be high cost would either be offered insurance at a high premium or rejected. By the time individuals reach the age of retirement, many have discernible health problems—in fact, a health problem may be the reason why the individual retired. Even if a retiree is initially judged low or moderate cost by the insurance company and therefore offered insurance at an affordable premium, what happens if the retiree later develops a costly health problem? Ideally, the insurance policy would be guaranteed renewable so that the insurer agrees to continue offering coverage without an unreasonable increase in the premium due to the onset of a costly medical problem. Although some insurers would offer guaranteed renewable insurance, others would not, and some retirees would find their insurance discontinued once they developed a costly health problem. With Medicare, when people reach age 65, they are given health insurance by the government that lasts for the rest of their life, regardless of what happens to their health or income. # Medicare Regulation of Hospital and Doctor Fees Initially Medicare simply paid hospitals and doctors whatever fees they charged, but in the 1980s, Medicare began regulating fees, first of hospitals and later of doctors. Hospitals were required to classify each patient as belonging to one of roughly five hundred diagnostic-related groups (DRGs), and Medicare set the fee that it would pay for a patient in each DRG. Later, Medicare established a resource-based relative value.