\# Public Finance

|                       |                  | r ⴝ 5%   | r ⴝ 15%     |
| --------------------- | ---------------- | -------- | ----------- |
| Correct Decision Rule | PV of profit     | $104,762 | $95,652     |
|                       | Cost of project  | $100,000 | $100,000    |
|                       | Correct decision | Build    | Don’t build |

Taking the present value is the opposite of compounding. If you put $100,000 in the bank in year 0 and the interest rate r is 10%, it would compound to $110,000 in year 1. So having $110,000 in year 1 is equivalent to having $100,000 in year 0. Hence, with r = 10%, the PV of $110,000 in year 1 is $100,000. If r = 5%, the PV of $110,000 equals $104,762; and if r = 15%, the PV of $110,000 equals $95,652. This leads us to the correct decision rule shown in Table 4.1: Build the factory if the PV of the future profit, $110,000, is greater than the cost, $100,000; don’t build the factory if the PV of the profit is less than the cost. # Building without Borrowing Suppose the firm has the cash from past profits to build another factory without borrowing. The decision to build still depends on whether the interest rate is greater or less than 10%—equivalently, on whether the PV of the profit exceeds the cost ($100,000). At first glance, it might seem that without borrowing, the interest rate is irrelevant, but this is not so. If the firm doesn’t build the factory, it can keep its $100,000 in the bank so that it earns interest. If r = 5%, the bank account would grow to $105,000 next year, so it would be better to build the factory and earn a profit of $110,000 next year. However, if r = 15%, the bank account would grow to $115,000 next year, so it would be better not to build the factory. Thus, whether or not the firm must borrow, it remains true that the correct decision is to build the factory if and only if the PV of the profit (computed using the actual interest rate) exceeds the cost. The numbers in Table 4.1 remain relevant. If r = 5%, the PV of the profit will be $104,762 so the factory should be built. If r = 15%, the PV of the profit will be $95,652 so the factory shouldn’t be built. # Multiyear Profits Now suppose that the factory lasts two years instead of one. Profit is $55,000 in year 1 and $60,500 in year 2. Then the present value of profits over the two years is PV of profits = \\(\frac{\[$55,000]}{(1 + r)} + \frac{\[$60,500]}{(1 + r)²}\\) where r is the interest rate. Note that the year 1 profit is divided by (1 + r) but the year 2 profit is divided by (1 + r)². Note also that if there were a year 3 profit, it would be divided by (1 + r)³. If r is 10%, then: PV of profits = \\(\frac{($55,000)}{1.10} + \frac{($60,500)}{1.10²} = $50,000 + $50,000 = $100,000\\) If r is less than 10%, the PV of the profits will be greater than the cost ($100,000), and the factory should be built. If r is greater than 10%, the PV of the profits will be less than the cost ($100,000), and the factory should not be built. Thus, the correct decision rule remains the same: Build the factory if the PV of future profits is greater than the cost; don’t build the factory if the PV of profits is less than the cost.