\# 68 Public Finance # FIGURE 3.2 Voter Preferences

| Only voter D has two |                | L            | •     | M |
| -------------------- | -------------- | ------------ | ----- | - |
| 1st                  | D              | •            | •     | H |
| 2nd                  | M              | •            | •     | D |
| Choice               | •              | L            |       |   |
| 3rd                  | H              | •            | •     | M |
|                      | D              | L            |       |   |
|                      | •              | •            | •     |   |
|                      | Thin           | Intermediate | Thick |   |
|                      | Wall thickness |              |       |   |

and then the first winner is run against the remaining option, the remaining option always wins—so there is “cycling”: The prize for winning moves round and round from option to option; there is no clear, stable winner. This is sometimes called the voting paradox. Figure 3.2 shows the preferences of the four families: H, M, L, and D. All but D have single-peaked preferences; that is, when each family’s preferences are plotted, there is one peak. By contrast, D has double-peaked preferences—when its preferences are plotted, there are two peaks. If some families have double-peaked preferences, pair-wise voting may result in cycling with no clear, stable winner. # An Island Government When There Are Many Families Suppose that the island has many families. There is no practical way for all the families to sit down together voluntarily, decide on each family’s cost-share, and choose the thickness of the wall. Suppose a government is established to tackle this problem. Assume that a government with a legislature and an executive (a president, prime minister, or governor) has been established, and the construction ship crew approaches the government with its offer to build a defensive wall. The legislature will need to have the power of taxation. If the legislature simply appealed to families to make voluntary contributions, what would happen? Some families would contribute substantially because they believe it is morally right to help finance a defensive wall. But many families would contribute little or nothing because a defensive wall is a public good, so if the wall is built, no family can be excluded from benefiting. What should the government do? Look back at Figure 3.1, but instead of three MB curves, imagine many. The socially optimal wall thickness is where the ⌺MB curve (the vertical sum of the MB curves of all the families) intersects the MC curve. If the government knew each family’s MB curve, it should assign each family a tax price (cost-share) that makes the family prefer the social optimum—a tax price that equals the height of the family’s MB curve at the social optimum. The government should then purchase the socially optimal (efficient) wall thickness from the construction firm and levy the taxes needed to finance it. Families would unanimously support the government’s choice of the socially optimal wall thickness. # Optimal Taxation Suppose that the height of every family’s MB curve happened to be exactly proportional to its income—if one family has four times the income of another, its MB curve