\# Chapter 11 Education There would, however, be a major problem. The cost of education occurs during college, but the benefit occurs after graduation. To make the economically efficient decision, the individual must either have family funds for college or be able to borrow. Low- and even middle-income families don’t have sufficient funds and must borrow. But why should this be a problem? As long as the increase in earnings really exceeds the cost (including interest) of college, the borrower will be able to repay the loan. The problem is that a lender cannot be sure that the individual’s earnings will be sufficient to repay the loan. Lending to an individual who buys a college education is riskier than lending to an individual who buys a home. With a home, the lender usually requires that the home be used as collateral for the loan, so if the individual fails to make the agreed repayments on schedule, the lender has the right to take the home. With college, collateral may not be available. Without collateral, the lender may insist on a much higher interest rate or refuse to make the loan. Thus, low- and moderate-income individuals may be unable to get loans even though it would be economically efficient for them to attend college. The outcome would be inequitable as well as inefficient. The collateral problem would drastically limit college attendance by low-income high school graduates, but hardly at all by high-income high school graduates. Affluent families usually have funds on hand to finance college, so they don’t need to borrow. Thus, access to college would depend on family income. # Public Colleges with Tuition below Cost One approach to the collateral problem is public colleges. In the United States, every state government operates at least one public college that charges tuition well below cost to residents, with the difference made up by state tax revenue. Tuition is generally much higher for out-of-state residents though still usually below full cost. Low tuition enables low-income high school graduates to attend college with little or no borrowing. Moreover, local governments operate two-year (“community”) colleges and vocational training schools that charge tuition below cost with the difference made up by local tax revenue. There are several shortcomings with this approach. First, it requires state taxes. Most of the tax burden falls on families that don’t send their children to the state college. Moderate-income taxpayers without children at a state college help pay for the education of young people who will go on to earn a relatively high income. Second, this approach distorts the choice of college for in-state high school seniors. Consider a family choosing between its low-tuition state college and a full-tuition private college or a public college in another state that charges high out-of-state tuition. The family may choose the state college because of the huge tuition gap even if it prefers another college.5 Third, it causes some economic inefficiency by inducing some high school graduates to attend college because tuition is well below full cost, even if the benefits (monetary and nonmonetary) of college are less than the full cost of college. # Student Loans and Financial Aid Another approach to the collateral problem is government assistance in providing loans and financial aid to students. 5 If a state college were content to enroll only its own residents, it would feel less pressure to operate efficiently, given its artificial advantage; however, most state colleges seek to attract out-of-state students at high tuition, and to do so, they must operate efficiently.