\# 50 Public Finance # Costs of the Permit System It should be acknowledged that a tradable permit system entails costs that are avoided by technology mandates such as requiring every utility to install a scrubber. With permits, emissions must be accurately measured, monitored, and audited; and transactions costs are incurred by buyers and sellers in the permit market. There is a risk that the permit price will be subject to speculation that generates erratic price fluctuations based on psychology rather than cost. But it appears that these costs have been substantially less than the cost saving that results from letting each plant decide how to respond to the permit price. To ensure political support from the electricity industry for the Clean Air Act Amendments in 1990, the legislation prescribed that the government give, not sell, the permits to electric utility firms. As noted earlier, this has two shortcomings. First, this gift or subsidy to the industry will in the long run lead to higher output and emissions than socially optimal. Second, because no revenue is raised, the government cannot cut other taxes. It remains to be seen whether it is politically possible to charge polluters a price—either by selling permits or levying an emissions tax—without giving the polluting industry a gift or subsidy. # A Carbon Tax or Tradable Permits to Reduce Global Warming According to most scientists, gaseous carbon emissions (such as carbon dioxide) from the burning of carbon fuels are contributing to global warming. If so, it would be worth reducing carbon emissions if the cost of reduction is less than the future harm from global warming. Economists agree that rather than use command and control technology regulations, a price should be put on carbon emissions to give potential emitters an incentive to cut back. The price can be implemented either through a carbon tax or carbon permits. Because carbon emissions anywhere in the world contribute to global warming, ideally potential emitters in all countries should be faced with the same carbon emissions price so that a given reduction in global warming can be achieved at minimum cost to the world economy. There are two policy decisions that must be made. First, which should be used: a carbon tax or carbon permits (cap and trade)? Second, how can low-income countries like China and India be induced to participate in cutting carbon emissions? Earlier in this chapter we discussed the pros and cons of a tax versus permits; the application to carbon is examined in the box titled “A Carbon Tax versus a Carbon Cap and Trade Program.” The second decision—the participation of low-income countries—is discussed in the remainder of this section where we consider how to induce the participation of low-income countries under either a carbon tax treaty or a carbon permits (cap and trade) treaty. # A Carbon Tax Treaty Consider how a carbon tax treaty would address this problem. For administrative feasibility, carbon would be taxed upstream at the point it enters the economy through a few thousand fuel producers rather than downstream when it is actually emitted (in gaseous form) by millions of drivers and homeowners and by thousands of factories and electric utility plants. Thus coal would be taxed when mined, and oil and natural gas when pumped or refined or imported. Each would be taxed according to its carbon content. The fuel producers and importers subject to the carbon tax would then pass the tax on in higher prices so that all fuel users in the economy would face these higher prices. According to a Congressional Budget Office (CBO) study, a carbon tax of $100 per ton, which would raise the price of gasoline about $0.30