\# Chapter 12 Low–Income Assistance reimburse the purchase of health insurance) or in kind (e.g., free medical care under Medicaid). If each recipient is regarded as the best judge of how to maximize her family’s utility or well-being, and if taxpayers care only about the recipient’s utility—not how it is achieved—then it would be best to give unrestricted cash rather than restricted assistance. Recipients have different preferences and needs, and each will reach a higher utility if free to allocate her funds accordingly. Many taxpayers, however, question whether the recipient will be the best judge of how to maximize her family’s utility. There is concern that some recipients will use unrestricted cash in ways that will not maximize the utility of their children or even of themselves. Restricted assistance can be viewed as a method of educating recipients about the best way to maximize their family’s well-being. Moreover, many taxpayers care about the means that a recipient uses to pursue utility. Even if a recipient feels happier using taxpayer money in a particular way, taxpayers may have different preferences about how their money should be used. Taxpayers may be glad that their tax money helps recipients buy medical care and food for their children but not expensive entertainment or fancy clothes. In other words, there may be a consumption externality. When a recipient uses taxpayer money to buy medical care or food for her children, taxpayers may experience an increase in their own utility, whereas if a recipient uses taxpayer money to buy expensive entertainment or fancy clothes, taxpayers may experience a decrease in their own utility. In the United States and many other countries, restricted assistance for low-income families is much larger than unrestricted cash assistance. This may be socially optimal if recipients are not good judges of how to maximize their family’s utility, or if there are significant consumption externalities so that the utility of taxpayers is significantly affected by how their money is used by recipients. # Medicaid By far the largest program that assists only low-income people is Medicaid, as is evident in Table 12.1. Medicaid provides health insurance for people with low income and low assets. Medicaid helps two groups: poor families with children and the elderly who have used up their assets paying for nursing home care. Medicaid is an in-kind benefit rather than a cash benefit: Instead of giving cash to people, Medicaid pays their medical bills so they get medical care for free. Note a striking fact from the table:

| Federal spending on Medicaid                                                 | $191 billion |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------ |
| Federal spending on cash welfare for low-income single mothers with children | $24 billion  |

It should be pointed out that an important share of Medicaid recipients are elderly residents of nursing homes who were not poor while they worked but who have become poor by paying for nursing home care. Still, Medicaid goes only to people who currently have low income and low assets. Medicaid is a joint federal-state program—the federal government pays a larger share for low-income states than for high-income states. On average Medicaid absorbs about 20% of state budgets. In each state Medicaid sets a fee schedule for paying doctors and hospitals. Medicaid pays most or all of each patient’s medical bill; there is little or no patient cost sharing. To qualify for Medicaid, a family must sign up at a Medicaid office by documenting its low income and low assets (bank balance, etc.).