\# 234 Public Finance # Computing Household Consumption The following example illustrates how a household would compute its consumption. Suppose a household earns $70,000 in salaries, receives $6,000 in interest and dividends, and sells stocks and bonds for $4,000, for a total cash inflow of $80,000. If the household increases its savings account balance by $8,000, buys new stocks and bonds for $12,000, and has $10,000 of tax withheld from its paychecks, its total nonconsumption cash outflow is $30,000. Therefore, its consumption is $50,000 ($80,000 minus $30,000). Several practical problems arise under a household consumption tax that do not exist under an income tax. For example, it would be too burdensome for a household to be taxed on its huge expenditure on a home in the year it is purchased; some method is needed to spread the tax over time. One option would be to treat the purchase of a home as a tax-deductible investment in the year of purchase but then require the household every year to add 5% of the market value of its home to its other consumption on its 1040 return (5% of the home’s market value would be an estimate of its housing consumption that year); this option requires the household to provide an estimate of the market value of its home each year, so that the IRS would have to instruct households on how to make the estimate. Several practical problems that arise under an income tax would be eliminated under a household consumption tax. Employee compensation is complex under an income tax: Should stock options be taxed as ordinary income or be given special capital gains treatment? Compensation is simple under a consumption tax: Only cash received by the household is counted in its cash inflows. A capital gain is complex under an income tax: Should an attempt be made to make up for the advantage of deferring tax until the year of sale? A capital gain is simple under the consumption tax: Only cash from the sale of stock is counted in its cash inflows. Finally, saving is complex under the income tax: Which savings vehicles—for example, IRA or 401(k) plan—should be granted a tax deduction? Saving is simple under the consumption tax: All saving is tax deductible. # A Progressive Consumption Tax on Very High Consumption A more modest proposal than replacing the income tax with a consumption tax would be to introduce a progressive consumption tax on very high consumption as a supplement to the income tax. All households would remain subject to the income tax. However, high-income households would also be subject to a progressive consumption tax which would be collected through the regular 1040 income tax return. Households with income of less than $500,000 would be exempt from the progressive consumption tax, and households with income above $500,000 would pay a consumption tax only on consumption above $500,000. Two arguments can be given for instituting a progressive consumption tax on very high consumption: one traditional and one novel. The traditional argument is that instituting such a tax would be less harmful to the economy than raising income tax rates on the very affluent. Raising income tax rates discourages saving and financial investment, because it raises tax rates on interest, dividends, and capital gains. Less saving and investment mean less economic growth. A progressive consumption tax avoids such discouragement to saving and investment. The novel argument for taxing very high consumption is that it generates a negative externality. According to this view, when the very affluent increase the size of their homes or the luxury of their possessions or vacations, unintentionally they raise the implicit standard against which the merely affluent unconsciously measure their own consumption; the merely affluent become less satisfied with their own consumption.