\# 280 Public Finance neighborhoods. To prevent a significant exodus of children to private schools, public schools would have to offer satisfactory quality. Would the exit of some low-income children to private schools help or hurt the low-income children who remain at their public school? On the one hand, families that are motivated and informed enough to exit are more likely to have children who would have been positive role models for other students; the exit of these students may have a negative impact on the students who remain. On the other hand, the threat of exit exerts pressure on public school teachers and administrators to work harder to provide satisfactory quality to students; this pressure should have a positive impact on the students who remain. # Tuition versus Taxes Why don’t public schools charge any tuition? The answer is obvious in low-income, inner-city neighborhoods: Any significant tuition would pose a serious financial barrier for many poor families. It is less obvious why no tuition is charged in affluent suburbs. Public schools in affluent towns could raise revenue at least partly from tuition, so that less revenue would have to be raised from taxes. Of course, even affluent suburbs usually have some low-income families, so scholarships would have to be provided to enable these families to afford a significant tuition, requiring these families to submit information on income and assets. One explanation for setting zero tuition is that it avoids the need for a scholarship application process. A more important explanation for zero tuition in affluent towns is the voting power of the parents of public school children. When schools are operated by an elected local school board or a board appointed by elected local officials, voters influence the financing. Parents with public school children would prefer zero tuition and full reliance on taxes, while voters without public school children would prefer significant public school tuition that enables lower taxes. If public school parents outnumber other voters, then the school board may well set tuition at zero. Of course, the greater the reliance on taxes rather than tuition, the greater the political resistance of voters without public school children to raising public school quality. Imagine instead that public schools were financed completely by tuition and not at all by local taxes. Then voters without public school children would offer no resistance to raising public school quality by raising public school tuition. So public school parents face a trade-off. They benefit directly from zero tuition, but they then face greater political resistance from other voters to higher public school quality. # The Public-Private School Tuition Gap Zero tuition drastically tilts the playing field between public and private schools. Consider a parent choosing between a zero-tuition public school and a high-tuition private school. Even if the quality of the public school is lower than the private school, the parent may choose the public school because of the huge gap in tuition. 2 The gap is made possible by the tax financing of public schools. Economists generally oppose subsidizing one good but not others because the subsidy gives an artificial advantage to the subsidized good and distorts the choice of consumers, steering them toward the subsidized good through an artificially low price. Economists agree that a level playing field undistorted by subsidies is usually best. Nevertheless, an argument can be made that it is socially optimal to encourage parents to send their children to the neighborhood public school rather than a private 2 This point is illustrated in the appendix to this chapter, using an indifference-curve/budget-line diagram.