\# Chapter 8 Income Taxes • The date on which wealth is measured may not reflect average wealth over the year or the period. Wealth is a stock which is measured at a moment in time. But with fluctuations in the stock market, wealth on one day may differ substantially from wealth on another day. By contrast, income is a flow measured over the entire year. A wealth tax could require a household to compute its wealth on several specific dates and take the average, but this would raise the cost of complying with the tax. • A wealth tax encourages a household to consume rather than save; the more you spend down your wealth, the lower your wealth tax. The tax discourages the accumulation of real capital in the economy and therefore reduces workers’ productivity and wages. # ISSUES IN TAXING LABOR INCOME Let’s consider several interesting issues in taxing labor income. # Household Taxation, Progressivity, and the Second Earner To work or not to work: that is the question facing a potential second earner. The answer is affected by the income tax. Why? Household taxation plus progressivity creates a dilemma for a potential second earner in a household. What is the dilemma? Call the person in a household with the highest income the “first earner.” Suppose the first earner in family H earns income high enough to place the household in the top tax bracket—35%. Now consider the dilemma of a potential second earner. If the second earner goes to work, the second earner’s first $100 earned will be taxed $35 (and the rest of her earnings will also be taxed 35%). Thus, the second earner immediately faces the marginal tax rate achieved by the first earner. This can be discouraging for the potential second earner who might therefore decide that it doesn’t pay to go to work. Given household taxation, the source of the second earner’s dilemma is progressivity. Suppose instead that the income tax were proportional with all household income (no exemptions or deductions) taxed at the same rate. The marginal tax rate facing the second earner would be independent of how much income the first earner earns. So the second earner dilemma is a consequence of progressivity. One way to reduce the second-earner dilemma while preserving progressivity would be to institute a second-earner deduction. A 10% second-earner deduction (up to a maximum of $3,000) was in effect in the United States from 1981 to 1986; on the first $30,000 of the second earner, 10% would be deductible; for example, if the second earner made $30,000, then $3,000 would be deductible, so the household’s taxable income would increase $27,000, not $30,000. If the first earner put the household in a 35% tax bracket, then with the 10% deduction, the second earner’s tax would be .35($27,000) = $9,450 instead of .35($30,000) = $10,500, a tax saving of $10,500 - $9,450 = $1,050. The 10% deduction would reduce the second earner’s tax by 10% (from 35% to 31.5%). If the second-earner deduction were 40%, then a similar calculation shows that the marginal tax rate facing the second earner would be reduced by 40%—for example, from 35% to 21%. More generally, if the second earner’s deduction were D%, then the marginal tax rate facing the second earner would be reduced by D%. The second-earner dilemma can be eliminated while preserving progressivity by taxing each individual rather than each household. With individual taxation, every earner would be a “first earner.” Even if the rate schedule were progressive, the first...