\# 236 Public Finance pay more tax ($20,000 instead of $10,000). So $10,000 has been shifted from C, who would have consumed it, to S who saves it. This horizontal redistribution effect raises total saving (it is “horizontal” because it is a shift between two people with the same income, not a shift from rich to poor). The bottom block of the table shows that the increase in total saving would be even greater if C responds to the new tax incentive by doing some saving. Because S consumes nothing, C must pay $20,000 in tax. However, if C now pays $20,000 in tax, assume that C would consume $60,000 and save $20,000. Hence, the government should set the consumption tax rate at 33% ($20,000/$60,000 33%). Total saving increases from $90,000 to $120,000 because S increases saving from $90,000 to $100,000 (the horizontal redistribution effect), and C increases saving from $0 to $20,000 (the incentive effect). Finally, replacing an income tax with a consumption tax should raise capital accumulation in the economy through the postponement effect. Consider the life cycle of an individual. The person’s income rises over a work career until retirement when labor income ceases and only capital income continues to be earned, so there is a sharp drop in income at retirement. Hence, over his life cycle, the person’s income tax increases until retirement when it drops sharply; a person pays more tax in a typical year when working than when retired. With a consumption tax, an individual who saves enough during his work years can avoid having to cut consumption in retirement. Hence, over his life cycle, a person who plans ahead pays roughly the same consumption tax in a typical year when either working or retired. Thus, if the income tax is replaced by a consumption tax, the person will pay less tax during the work stage of life and more tax during the retirement stage; tax will be postponed to later in life. The reduction in tax during the work stage of life will enable the person to save more during this stage. Hence, persons will accumulate more capital during their life cycle, and, correspondingly, the economy will accumulate more capital due to this postponement effect. # Impact on Efficiency Loss An income tax consists of a tax on capital income and a tax on labor income. As we saw in Chapter 7, the tax on capital income causes an efficiency loss in the choice between saving and consuming, while the tax on labor income causes an efficiency loss in the choice between work and leisure. We now show that replacing the income tax with a consumption tax removes the efficiency loss in the choice between saving and consuming but may increase the efficiency loss in the choice between work and leisure. Hence, the net impact on efficiency depends on which efficiency change is larger. Look back at Figure 7.10 which shows the efficiency loss from a tax on capital income. The 40% tax on capital income tax drives a wedge between the firm’s investment return on the machine of 5% and each saver’s after-tax return of 3%. Starting from the saving chosen under the 40% tax, it would be possible to increase saving $100 and make everyone better off. Each saver only needs to receive a 3% return to keep his utility constant, but the $100 machine generates a return of 5%. Hence, 3% can be given to the saver, and the remaining 2% can be distributed to everyone else, making them better off. Each additional $100 of saving generates a return on the machine that exceeds the return that savers require to keep their utility constant until the intersection is reached, so the efficiency loss equals the area of the triangle. If the income tax is replaced by a consumption tax, then the wedge between the investment return on a machine and the return the saver receives is eliminated. If the person takes $100 of income and saves it, there is no tax on the $100, and the person