\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance

| TABLE 6.1              |                                  |                                 |                       |        |   |   |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | --------------------- | ------ | - | - |
| Expected Medical Bills | Chance of a $61,000 Medical Bill | Chance of a $1,000 Medical Bill | Expected Medical Bill |        |   |   |
| High-cost person       | 9%                               | 91%                             | $6,400                |        |   |   |
| Low-cost person        |                                  | 1%                              | 99%                   | $1,600 |   |   |

The premium that you charge each person must cover the expected medical cost of that person plus the operating cost per person. Ignoring the operating cost, you must charge each person a price that covers her expected medical cost. With competition from other insurance companies, you will not be able to charge any higher. Thus, in a competitive insurance market, each person will be charged a price P equal to her expected medical cost (EMC). For person i: Pi = EMCi Thus, the price charged to a person will vary with the person’s expected medical cost, but the price will not vary with the person’s income. Throughout this discussion we often refer to a person who has a high expected medical cost as simply a high-cost person. Suppose your conscience bothers you about setting Pi = EMCi for each enrollee because you realize that it is often a matter of luck, not behavior or effort, that determines whether a person has a high or low expected medical cost. You feel guilty about charging the high-cost person a higher price than the low-cost person. Instead, you would rather charge them the same price. For example, instead of charging the high-cost person $6,400, and the low-cost person, $1,600, you would rather charge each $4,000 (the average of $6,400 and $1,600). What will happen if you do this? Some of your competitors will offer low-cost persons a price of only $1,600, and you will lose your low-cost enrollees. Left with only high-cost enrollees, you will have to raise your price to $6,400 to break even. Now suppose your conscience bothers you about setting the same price regardless of the person’s income. You decide to charge a price below medical cost for a low-income person and make it up by charging a price above medical cost for a high-income person. What will happen? Some of your competitors will offer your high-income enrollees a price equal to their expected medical cost, and you will lose your high-income enrollees. Left with only low-income enrollees, you will have to raise your price to their expected medical cost to break even. As long as some insurance companies don’t let conscience interfere with making a profit, each person will end up being charged a price equal to her expected cost. Note we’re simply assuming that some insurance companies are as interested in profit as companies making other goods and services. A normal profit motive is enough to cause each person to be charged a price equal to her expected medical cost. Our conclusion—that in a competitive individual insurance market each person will be charged a price equal to that person’s expected medical cost—has important implications. If everyone had roughly the same income and expected medical cost, things would work fine. But in fact there is significant variation in income and expected medical cost across individuals. Some people have low incomes and high expected medical costs. They may be charged a premium that is so high relative to their income that they can’t afford insurance. A person with a huge expected medical cost due to a chronic costly illness will either be charged a huge premium or simply be rejected.