\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance get the education or training to have high skills instead of low skills. Clearly, such an extremely progressive tax would cause a large efficiency loss, as individuals who could potentially have very high productivity forgo the education and training and settle for mediocre productivity. Thus, there is a trade-off: The more progressive the tax system, the greater its reduction in inequality, but the greater its efficiency loss to the economy. Each citizen will therefore prefer a different degree of progressivity depending on how that citizen personally weighs reducing inequality versus reducing efficiency. All these issues are discussed in depth in Chapters 7, 8, and 9. # Education: Chapter 11 Whereas many citizens take it for granted that government should operate most elementary and secondary schools, most economists do not. Economists begin by asking why we can’t rely on the free market to provide elementary and secondary schools. If the government did not operate public schools, private schools would spring up in every community, charge tuition, and engage in a competition to attract parents to enroll their children. This competition would compel schools to try to achieve high quality at an affordable price in order to attract and retain consumers—parents and their children—just as it does for countless other goods and services. Each private school would recognize that if it provides lower quality for the same tuition as its competitors, or the same quality at a higher tuition, it will gradually lose enrollees and revenues and be forced to contract. This competitive pressure would benefit consumers. Economists recognize, however, that another feature of a free market would pose a problem. A free market generates a wide variety of levels of quality and price for most goods and services. High-income people generally buy high-quality products at high prices, while low-income people buy low-quality products at low prices. Most citizens find this inequality acceptable for most goods and services, but many citizens would be troubled by wide variations in the quality of each child’s education according to parental income. Most citizens therefore conclude that government should operate most schools and charge no tuition. Economists point out, however, that it would be possible to reduce variation in quality without having government operate the schools. Government could levy taxes, whereby high-income households contribute more dollars than low-income households, and then distribute the same amount of dollars per child to each family earmarked for spending on school tuition. Such a program would raise the quality that low-income parents could afford. The government could further narrow differences in quality by giving a larger amount of dollars per child to low-income households than to high-income households. Thus, economists point out it would be possible to reduce quality differences without having government operate most schools. Nevertheless, a special problem arises with a private school market because many parents care about the family backgrounds of the other children who attend their child’s school—economists call this a consumption externality. As a consequence, private schools don’t sell their product to any buyer the way stores do. Private schools use selective admissions and screen applicants. As explained in Chapter 11, this consumption externality—a central feature of a private school market—may cause difficulties that provide a justification for a public school system. # Low-Income Assistance: Chapter 12 In a free market economy, individuals with low productivity are paid low wages. As a consequence, without government assistance their family’s consumption of goods and