\# Public Finance # FIGURE 1.7 Inefficiency from the Subsidy The inefficiency equals the triangle’s area.

|   | $12 |   |   |   | $4 |
| - | --- | - | - | - | -- |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |
|   |     |   |   |   |    |

It is also important to emphasize that even when the free market would generate the optimal quantity, a tax on good X to raise revenue to finance a beneficial government program might raise welfare. A tax on X would raise welfare as long as the benefit from the government program financed by the tax is greater than the burden from the tax including the inefficiency caused by the tax. # PROBLEMS FOR THE FREE MARKET Although the free market usually works well for consumers, it has several specific problems. We consider them in turn. # Externalities: Chapters 2 and 6 Suppose there is a significant cost generated by the production of good X that is not charged to the producers of X. For example, suppose that the production of each unit of X causes $4 of damage to the environment. The marginal social cost (MSC) is defined as the regular MC plus the marginal environmental damage. As shown in Figure 1.8, the MSC curve is $4 higher than the S curve. The S curve has a height equal to MC—the marginal cost actually charged to the firm which determines how much the firm wants to supply. The socially optimal quantity occurs at the intersection of the MSC curve and the MB curve—90 units of good X. Consider the 100th unit. The consumer is willing to pay $10 for the 100th unit, but the cost of the 100th unit is $14—$10 in resources and $4 in environmental damage. It would best if the 100th unit were not produced—and the same for the units from the 99th to the 91st—but the market goes to where D and S intersect (at 100 units), so the market generates too much of a good when its production involves a cost that is not charged to the producers—a negative externality. The free market generates too much of any good that has a negative externality.