\# Chapter 4 Cost-Benefit Analysis rather than cost-benefit analysis. With cost-effectiveness analysis, no attempt is made to compare the benefit with the cost. Cost-effectiveness analysis focuses on achieving a given objective at minimum cost. The case for imposing the same carbon tax on all emitters in all countries is that whatever the reduction in global warming, that reduction will be achieved at minimum cost to the economy (as explained in Chapter 2). Cost-effectiveness analysis, unlike cost-benefit analysis, does not try to determine the optimal level of reducing global warming. # PAYING FOR A COSTLY MEDICAL TREATMENT One of the most difficult and important applications of cost-benefit analysis concerns medical care. Advances in technology, medication, and medical procedures have made it possible to cure medical conditions that previously could not be treated, but often the new technology, medication, or procedure is expensive. Naturally, patients and their families usually want access to the best treatments, which also tend to be costly. The key issue becomes: Will the insurer—government or private—pay for costly treatment X? Any economist would reply that there should be a weighing of the benefit of X against its cost to arrive at a decision. Nevertheless, many people say they are ethically opposed to having cost considered. As long as the technology, medication, or procedure is judged “safe and effective,” they believe the insurer should pay for it. They contend that insurers should be obligated to pay unless they can prove that X is either unsafe or ineffective. Conversely, insurers contend that until X has been proved safe and effective, they should not be required to pay for it. What insurers and patients have in common is that neither will admit that cost should be considered. But imagine that treatment X, judged safe and effective, can extend the life of a patient from 100 to 101 years but at a cost of $1 million per patient. Should Medicare, the health insurance program for retirees that is operated by the federal government, pay for treatment X for patients who are 100 years old? Suppose that if Medicare pays, 1,000 patients who are 100 years old would request treatment X so the cost to Medicare would be $1 billion. Is it really sensible to ignore cost, or should the criterion instead be that X must not only be safe and effective but also have an acceptable cost-benefit ratio? One way to measure the benefit in this situation would be to ask hypothetical questions and answers—the method of contingent valuation—as we discussed under highway safety. But to whom should the questions be directed? One option would be to ask old sick persons and their families how much they would be willing to pay to obtain treatment X. Another option would be to ask middle-age persons how much they would be willing to pay today to have treatment X available should they need it when they become old and sick. It seems likely that old sick persons and their families would pay more than middle-age persons and their families who have the same income. If so, the measure of benefit might be an average of how much they would be willing to pay. The question can be refined further. One question might ask people how much they would pay to extend life from 100 to 101; another question, from 90 to 91; another, from 80 to 81. It seems likely that people would be willing to pay less for an extension from 100 to 101 than from 80 to 81. Suppose people are willing to pay more than the cost of treatment X for the extension from 80 to 81 but less than the cost for extension from 100 to 101. Should public policy consider “age rationing”—making treatment X available to 80-year-olds but not 100-year-olds? These are surely difficult issues—so