\# 86 Public Finance # Increased Output If someone dies on a busy highway, we can determine the output that person would have produced if she had survived without injury. An estimate of this output is the wage income the person would have earned over the rest of her life. This can be estimated by extrapolating from the person’s actual past wage income. Most economists find this method of estimating the value of a life saved unsatisfactory. Consider the implications. It may be true that person H would have produced 10 times more output than person L, but do we really want to value H’s life as 10 times as valuable as L’s? What about a person who doesn’t work in the marketplace for a wage? The value of saving that person’s life is surely not zero. Some economists suggest assigning a dollar value to the leisure time that people enjoy—at least this ensures that every life gets some dollar value. Finally, the benefit from a safer highway is greater than simply the work and leisure that the person can enjoy. The benefit includes the avoidance of suffering by the rest of the family—in coping with the shock of the accident and life thereafter. People might pay a lot to avoid such suffering, but this is ignored by focusing solely on the output that the deceased person would have produced. # Actual Market Behavior (Revealed Preference) We can observe how much people actually pay in the marketplace to reduce their chance of dying. There are two ways to pay. The first is by buying a good or service that reduces the chance of dying. The second is by choosing a lower-paying job because it is less dangerous. Let’s consider each. Cars have various features that reduce the chance of dying in an accident—airbags, structural strength, and so forth. When people have a choice of whether to buy the safety feature or not, their decision reveals how much they value reducing the odds of dying. If a person chooses to pay $5,000 more for an auto structure that has a 1 in 100 chance of saving the life of a family member, then that person is revealing that she values a 1 in 100 chance of saving a family member’s life by at least $5,000. Suppose a coal miner has a 1 in 100 chance of death on the job, while a clerk who works in the mining town has no chance of death on the job, but a coal miner is paid $5,000 more than the clerk. The pay difference is called a compensating differential. It might be inferred that a person who chooses to be a clerk instead of a miner values a 1 in 100 chance of saving her own life by at least $5,000. Of course, this inference is based on the assumption that the only reason the person prefers to be a clerk rather than a miner is to minimize the chance of death on the job. # Hypothetical Questions and Answers (Contingent Valuation) Another way to put a value on a life is to ask a hypothetical question. A survey can be administered that asks people the following question: “How much would you pay to reduce your chance of death on the highway from 2 in 1,000 to 1 in 1,000?” Critics contend that the answer may depend on the exact wording of the question. Imagine another way of asking the question: “Considering the shock to your family if a relative died on a highway, how much would you pay to reduce the chance of death on the highway from 2 in 1,000 to 1 in 1,000?” It is possible that most respondents would give roughly the same answer to both questions, but it is also possible that the different wording would elicit substantially different answers. Supporters of contingent valuation reply that actual market behavior has a similar problem. When a consumer in a car showroom is about to choose safety features for