\# 26 Public Finance than any other point on the budget line. As will be explained in a moment, it turns out that at this point, and only at this point, the budget line AB is tangent to an indifference curve—for example, point J—while at any other point on the budget line—for example, point K or L—the indifference curve cuts through the budget line instead of being tangent to it. But what is an indifference curve? Through any point (X, Y) in the diagram, it is useful to draw a curve connecting all other points that would give the person the same utility. For example, consider point I; suppose that point K would give the person the same utility as point I. Then through I, draw a curve that goes through K; each point on this curve would give the person the same utility. Similarly, consider point J and suppose that point S would give the individual the same utility. Then through J, draw a curve that goes through S; each point on this curve would give the person the same utility. It would be natural to call these curves “utility curves,” but they are called indifference curves. Why? Because the person would be indifferent to having point I or point K or point L. Just remember that any point on an indifference curve would give the person the same utility as any other point on that indifference curve. Consider two indifference curves, one through point S, the other through point I. Point S would give the person a higher utility than point I because S has more units of good X and also a larger expenditure Y on other goods. Since point J would give the person the same utility as point S, point J would give the person more utility than point I. Thus, the more “northeast” or higher is an indifference curve, the higher is its utility. Now consider three points the person can afford if the budget line is AB: J, K, and L. The person would prefer J to either K or L because J is on a higher indifference curve. The person would prefer point J, where the indifference curve is tangent to AB, to any other point on AB because any other point on AB is on a lower indifference curve than J. Thus, out of all the points on AB, the person would choose J.