\# 58 Public Finance # THE CONCEPT OF A PUBLIC GOOD A public good has two properties: (1) nonexcludability and (2) nonrivalry. Nonexcludability means that it is hard to exclude any person from benefiting from the good or service even if the person won’t pay for it. Nonrivalry means that consumption of the good or service by one person does not prevent consumption of the good by other people; in fact, all individuals simultaneously consume the same quantity of the good. By contrast, a private good has excludability—it is easy to exclude a person from benefiting from the good or service if the person refuses to pay for it, and it has rivalry—consumption of the good by one person prevents consumption by other people. A private good is consumed by only one person. Let’s give some examples. National defense is a public good: If a military force is established, equipped, and stands ready to defend the nation, it is hard to exclude any person from being defended; moreover, the quantity of defense is the same for all people. Police protection from criminals is a public good: If police deter potential criminals and apprehend actual criminals, it is hard to exclude any person from being protected. Air quality is a public good: It is hard to exclude any person from the air quality; moreover, the air quality is the same for all people in a given locality. What about fire protection? Is this service excludable to someone who won’t pay for it? It would be possible for a fire department to refrain from putting out a fire in the house of a homeowner who didn’t pay for fire protection. But in many cases this would jeopardize adjacent houses of homeowners who did pay for protection. Moreover, many citizens consider it wrong to let a fire burn down a house just because the owner hasn’t paid. So in practice local fire protection is a nonexcludable service. Some goods or services have one of the two properties but not the other. A cable TV program is excludable but not rival: It is easy to exclude someone who refuses to pay from receiving the program; but one person’s watching (consuming) the program does not prevent another from watching it. A crowded city street is rival but not excludable: When one car is driven on the street, it increases congestion and slows down other cars—reducing the consumption of the street by other drivers, but it is hard to exclude any particular car from entering the street (technology could change this—while toll booths on city streets are not feasible, electronic scanners might be, so cars could be billed for the use of city streets). Note that economists do not call anything provided by the government a “public good.” Although a public good usually ends up being financed by government, some public goods are provided by the private sector. Government also provides goods and services that are not public goods—that is, goods or services that are excludable and/or rival. For example, schooling is not a public good because it would be easy to exclude a child from school if his parents refused to pay. # Nonexcludability, the Free-Rider Problem, and Taxation Nonexcludability implies that it may be hard to get some individuals to voluntarily pay an adequate share of the cost of a public good because they know that they can’t be excluded from benefiting if the good is produced. True, some individuals will voluntarily pay because they believe it is morally right to contribute—they get a warm glow from doing the right thing. If national defense were funded by voluntary contributions rather than taxes, some individuals would donate large sums and many individuals would contribute something. Another reason some individuals contribute voluntarily is because they are altruistic—they are willing to