\# 106 Public Finance be completely self-sufficient. But during the transition, several generations of workers would be doing extra saving and bearing an extra burden, and several generations of retirees would be receiving somewhat less than they had been expecting. The key point is this: To convert from a workers-support-retirees system to a self-sufficient system, there must be sacrifice. Either the current retirees can be ditched, forcing them to bear the entire sacrifice even though they supported the previous generation of retirees when they worked, or one generation of workers must double-save but get only a single benefit, or the sacrifice must be spread out over several generations of workers and retirees. There is no painless way to convert from a workers-support-retirees system to an each-generation-self-sufficient system. Conversion may be worth it in the long run. But in the short run, breaking out is hard to do. # Defined Benefit versus Defined Contribution Even if breaking out weren’t hard to do, there is another important difference to consider in deciding whether to switch Social Security from a collective workers-support-retirees system to an individual self-sufficient system. The collective workers-support-retirees system is a defined-benefit plan, whereas the individual self-sufficient system is a defined-contribution plan. Under a defined-benefit plan, a worker is promised a retirement benefit that is linked by a formula to that worker’s preretirement wage history (a traditional pension would be one example of a defined-benefit plan). The formula can be set to give low-wage workers a replacement rate (the ratio of the monthly benefit to the preretirement monthly wage) that is greater than, equal to, or less than high-wage retirees. The defined benefit is an annuity: It is paid monthly for as long as the retiree lives, so that the total benefit the person receives during retirement depends on how long the person lives. The annuity can have an automatic inflation adjustment by which the monthly benefit is raised whenever the price of goods in the economy rises (the U.S. Social Security annuity has an automatic inflation adjustment, but many private defined-benefit pension plans do not). Under a defined-contribution plan, a worker’s retirement benefit is the sum that has actually accumulated for the worker from designated contributions made by the worker and employer over the worker’s career plus the investment income (interest, dividends, and capital gains) that has been earned in the worker’s account; a 401(k) would be an example of a defined-contribution plan. The worker owns the assets in the account and controls how the account is invested. Upon retirement the retiree may choose when and how much to draw down the accumulated sum during retirement (the retiree may use the sum to purchase an annuity from a private firm that sells annuities). U.S. Social Security has always been a defined-benefit plan. Several decades ago, most private pensions were also defined-benefit plans: The typical firm promised each worker a benefit that depended on that worker’s preretirement wage history at that firm. A serious shortcoming of a private sector defined-benefit plan is that often a worker must stay with the same firm until retirement to receive benefits. As more workers began to switch firms during their careers, many workers began to prefer that their pension plan be defined contribution, so they could take accumulated funds with them when they switched firms. Many employers also found defined-contribution plans appealing. With a defined-contribution plan, the employer’s obligation is to regularly contribute a specified amount to a worker’s pension fund. By contrast, with a defined-benefit plan the employer promises to pay a specified benefit many years in the future when each