\# 266 Public Finance tax, then in Figures 10.3(a) and 10.3(b), both supply and demand curves shift up the same amount, and the rent rises as much as the tax per apartment. Suppose the tax finances public schools that the renter’s children will attend without charge. If renters value the benefit from a free public school as much as the tax that finances it, then the introduction of a property tax to finance a public school would raise the rent by the amount of the tax per apartment. The apartment owner would bear no burden. In effect, the tax makes the renter pay for the school benefit. # The Burden of a Property Tax on Land Thus far we have assumed that the property tax falls on the value of structures—a home or an apartment building. However, the land itself on which the structure is built has property value. Prior to the building of a structure, vacant land can be sold or rented. Who bears the burden of a property tax on land? A key feature of land is that its supply is inelastic. If the land is sold, Figure 10.2(a) applies (S is steep) with land replacing homes on the x axis; the sellers of land bear most of the burden. If the land is rented, Figure 10.3(a) applies (S is steep) with land replacing apartments on the x axis; the landowners bears most of the burden. # The Burden of a Property Tax on Business Firms As we saw in Chapter 7, it is usually important to consider the indirect (general equilibrium) effects of a tax in order to determine its burden. Suppose Tax Town levies a property tax on business firms but Free Town doesn’t. The tax will reduce the after-tax return earned by firms in Tax Town, so firms will prefer to locate in Free Town, and the expansion of firms in Free Town will reduce their return. So business firms in both Tax Town and Free Town will earn a lower after-tax return, and hence business owners and investors in both towns, not just in Tax Town, will bear some burden. As firms relocate from Tax Town to Free Town, the supply of goods and services will contract in Tax Town and expand in Free Town; the price of goods will rise in Tax Town and fall in Free Town, so consumers in Tax Town will bear some burden, but consumers in Free Town will receive some benefit. Also, firms relocating in Free Town will increase their demand for labor in Free Town, raising the wage of workers in Free Town. Firms leaving Tax Town will decrease their demand for labor in Tax Town, lowering the wage of workers in Tax Town. Thus, consumers and workers, not just business owners, are affected by a property tax on business firms. # Arguments for the Residential Property Tax for Local Governments Several arguments can be given for having local governments rely on a flat rate residential property tax for financing local services. First, a residential property tax doesn’t discourage economic activity in the community in contrast to the following taxes: a tax on wage income earned or profits generated or sales transacted in the community. Second, it generates predictable revenue for each local budget cycle, because the total assessed value of residential property in the community is known in advance. Setting the tax rate determines the revenue; by contrast, the revenue that will be collected from an income or sales tax cannot be known in advance because income and sales are not known. Third, it is easy to administer because each resident is simply sent a bill; there is no need for the taxpayer to fill out a tax return or pay an accountant. Fourth, the benefit a resident gets from several local public services varies directly with the value of the resident’s property; when the police and fire departments protect