\# Chapter 4 Cost-Benefit Analysis total more than $50, further cutback is optimal; and if they total less than $50, less cutback is optimal. # Uncertainty and the Risk of Catastrophe Suppose there is a small chance that failure to reduce global warming will lead to catastrophe—enormous values for $X, $Y, and $Z. Then it is unsatisfactory simply to use the most likely values of $X, $Y, and $Z and compare them to the cost of reducing global warming. The analysis should incorporate the possibility that the future benefit of reducing global warming will be huge—avoiding a catastrophe. One way to incorporate the possibility of catastrophe is to use a weighted average of the most likely values and the catastrophic values of $X, $Y, and $Z, where the weights for the catastrophic values equal the estimated probability of occurrence. Of course, the probability can only be estimated, not known with certainty, but some adjustment is surely better than simply ignoring the possibility of catastrophe in weighing cost against benefit to arrive at a decision. # The Social Discount Rate To compare today’s cost to tomorrow’s benefit, analysts must discount the future benefit to obtain the present value. They must determine what should be the social discount rate—the rate analysts use to compute the present value of future benefits. The higher the social discount rate, the lower the PV of future benefits, and the less likely that the marginal benefit will exceed the marginal cost for the proposed government policy. For a business firm seeking profit, the market interest rate at which the firm can actually borrow is utilized as the discount rate. For a government that is building or improving a highway, the market interest rate at which the government can actually borrow is also generally utilized as the proper discount rate. In both cases, the market interest rate indicates what could have been generated by the funds through alternative investments if the funds were not used by the firm or the government. For a very long-term problem that spans generations, like global warming, there is less of a consensus about whether the market interest rate is the appropriate discount rate. Some economists contend that because the central issue is the trade-off between the well-being of different generations (rather than the same generation at different ages in its life cycle), the social discount rate—the rate the government should use for a cost-benefit evaluation of a long-term policy—should be lower than the actual market interest rate at which the government can borrow. Other economists favor using the market interest rate. They argue that if a particular policy fails the cost-benefit test using a market interest rate, this means that the policy is not the best way for the current generation to help a future generation. Instead, the current generation should use the funds to save and invest productively for the future, earning a return equal to the market interest rate. Rather than cut back today’s output to cut back carbon, the current generation should save and invest more, leaving future generations with a higher capital stock to compensate for the warming. For an example of the importance of the discount rate, see the box “The Debate over the 2006 Stern Review on Global Warming.” # Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Needless to say, estimating the future benefits of reducing global warming is extremely difficult. A more modest goal is to make sure that any reduction in global warming is done at minimum cost to the economy. This requires cost-effectiveness analysis.