\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment # FIGURE 2.1 The Trade-Off between Output and Environmental Quality

| A | A |
| - | - |
| B | B |
| C | C |
| D | D |
| E | E |
| F | F |

Raising environmental quality to level E, so the economy would move “northwest” on the trade-off curve from point F to point E. Suppose people subjectively value the improvement from level F to level E more than the required loss in output. Then it should be done. Starting from E, consider reducing output just enough to reach quality level D. Once again, if people value the improvement from E to D more than their loss in output, it should be done. Suppose the environmental improvement outweighs the output loss until level B is reached. Starting at level B, suppose people subjectively value an improvement from B to A less than the required loss in output. Then an improvement to A should not be done, and point B would be the point on the trade-off curve that is best for people’s welfare. # The Virtues of Pollution Prices Once the target for pollutant X has been determined, why not just assign a quota (ceiling) to each polluter of X to ensure that the aggregate quantity of X equals the target? Once the aggregate target has been set, how do we decide which firms should do the polluting—that is, how do we allocate pollution among the polluters? For example, suppose current aggregate pollution of chemical X is 5,000 units, there are 100 polluters of X, and it is decided that the aggregate target for pollutant X should be 1,000 units (a cutback of 80%). One simple approach would be to command each polluter to emit no more than 10 units of X. But this doesn’t take into account the varying production levels of the 100 polluters. A simple approach that does take this into account would be to command each polluter to cut back 80% from its current emissions (emit only 20% of its current level). Another approach would be to control the production technology that firms can use in order to reduce the emissions of X; this technology-forcing approach is generally taken by the U.S. government and most other governments around the world. Unfortunately, this command and control method is a poor way to handle the allocation problem. First, the 100 polluters of X produce a variety of products. Consumers value some products more than others. Surely we want the allocation to take account of consumer preference for the products. Second, the polluters differ in