\# 22 Public Finance

| TABLE 1.2 “The Big Three”               |      |      |              |           |             |
| --------------------------------------- | ---- | ---- | ------------ | --------- | ----------- |
|                                         |      |      | Fed Spending | Fed Taxes | Fed Deficit |
| Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security | 2000 | 8%   | 20%          | 0%        |             |
|                                         |      | 2010 | 10%          | 22%       | 2%          |
|                                         | 2020 | 12%  | 24%          | 4%        |             |
|                                         | 2030 | 14%  | 26%          | 6%        |             |
|                                         |      | 2040 | 16%          | 28%       | 8%          |

22% of GDP in 2010 to 28% in 2040. If federal tax revenue stays 20% of GDP, the federal deficit will rise to 8% of GDP in 2040. Recall that the annual federal deficit has averaged 2% of GDP over the past 40 years. # Summary Perhaps the most basic role of government is to protect people and private property from criminals—protection that is essential for making the free market possible. The free market usually works well for consumers and produces roughly the right quantity of most goods and services, and this can be explained using the basic supply and demand diagram. Nevertheless, the free market has certain problems. When there are externalities, the free market does not produce the right quantity. For a good with a negative externality, the free market produces too much; for a good with a positive externality, too little. When a good or service—like national defense or police protection—benefits everyone because they can’t be excluded from benefiting whether they pay or not, the good or service is called a public good, and there is a free-rider problem. Most economists agree that the best practical solution to the free-rider problem is taxation. Whereas virtually all economists agree that government intervention is warranted for externalities and public goods, economists disagree about social insurance. Some economists think old age insurance and health insurance should be left to the market, while other economists think such insurance should be provided by government. Economists who support government intervention disagree about the kind of intervention. The tax system can be used to modify the after-tax distribution of income. A progressive income tax would reduce inequality because it applies higher tax rates to high-income households than to low-income households. Economists agree that this would cause some weakening of incentives and an efficiency loss to the economy, but they disagree about how much. Whereas most citizens take it for granted that government should operate most elementary and secondary schools, most economists do not take it for granted and ask whether a private school market could work better. A special problem arises with a private school market because many parents care about the family backgrounds of the other children who attend their child’s school. As a consequence of this consumption externality, private schools don’t sell their product to any buyer the way stores do. Private schools use selective admissions and screen applicants. This feature of a private school market may cause difficulties that provide a rationale for a public school system. In a free market economy, individuals with low productivity get paid low wages. As a consequence, without government assistance, their family’s consumption of goods and services would be low—in particular, they would be unable to afford adequate health insurance and medical care. If citizens want low-productivity people