\# Chapter 5 Social Security By 2008, the Social Security Trust Fund had accumulated over $2.3 trillion in interest-earning U.S. government bonds, nearly four times annual benefits paid; according to the chief actuary, it is on track to reach nearly five times annual benefits in 2015. If this accumulation had not occurred, then around 2020 Congress would have had to cut the monthly benefit because in that year tax revenue will become less than benefits due under the current Social Security benefit formula. However, with this accumulated sum earning interest, payroll taxes plus interest income will exceed benefits due until about 2030; then the fund itself can be drawn down over the next decade by gradually exchanging the U.S. bonds for cash from the U.S. Treasury, so that there is no need to make the monthly benefit smaller than currently scheduled until about 2040. Thus, the building up of the Social Security Trust Fund since the mid-1980s (and the gradual raising of the retirement age) has succeeded in pushing back the year that the monthly benefit must be cut from 2020 to 2040—a postponement of two decades. It shouldn’t be surprising that mitigating the 2040 problem requires sacrifice. An important source of the 2040 problem is that people are living longer. Consider an individual facing the prospect of living longer. The prospect itself is a blessing, but preparing for it involves sacrifice. A sensible individual would strike a compromise between saving more while working, working to an older age, and reducing consumption in retirement. Let’s consider how Social Security might do the same. # Ways to Raise Tax Growth Payroll tax revenue can be increased in three different ways. First, the payroll tax rate (the percentage) can be raised; this would impose an additional tax burden on low- and moderate-income workers as well as high-income workers. Second, the payroll tax ceiling ($102,000 in 2008) can be raised; this would impose a 12.4% tax on newly taxed payroll (note that it would automatically raise benefits to which high-income workers are entitled because the benefit formula links the benefit to the ceiling). Third, payroll above the ceiling can be taxed. Since 1994, Medicare has taxed all payroll above the Social Security ceiling at a combined (employer plus employee) rate of 2.9%. One option would be to tax payroll above the ceiling an additional 3%; alternatively, instead of a flat 3%, the rates could be raised in steps from 1% to 5% as income above the ceiling increases. # Ways to Slow Benefit Growth In order to slow benefit growth, Social Security could encourage people to work to an older age. Today, most people work at jobs that are physically less demanding than years ago, and they remain healthy enough to work to an older age. Of course, some people still work at physically demanding jobs or develop poor health at an early age. In the early 1980s, Congress scheduled a gradual increase in the full benefit age, beginning in 2000 from 65 to 66 and then after a 10-year delay from 66 to 67. One option would be to reduce or eliminate the delay in setting the FBA at 67, so that 67 is reached sooner, and then continue to increase the FBA until it reaches 68. Congress has not scheduled any increase in the earliest eligibility age which is still 62. We saw that in the United States and other countries many workers choose to retire as soon as they reach the Social Security EEA. One option to help slow benefit growth would be to schedule—with advanced warning of perhaps five years—an increase in the EEA from 62 to 63 (and perhaps eventually to 64). If benefit growth must be reduced, the burden can be placed mainly on affluent retirees or spread across all retirees. Placing the burden mainly on the affluent can be