\# Chapter 13 Government Borrowing will then be forced to spend only what it collects in tax revenue, and this may require a sudden painful cut in its spending or an increase in taxes. It may lose the ability to borrow in an emergency. Although the federal government has the power to print money, such a solution would be inflationary and therefore harmful to the economy. Thus, it is important for the federal government to avoid excessive borrowing. # The Burden of the Debt Does borrowing burden future generations? Let’s explore this question with regard to a family, and then we will turn to government. Do parents burden their children by borrowing? Does the government burden future generations by borrowing? # The Burden of Family Borrowing Suppose parents borrow to finance their own consumption—every year they travel to a vacation resort and leave their children with a sitter. Then they die in debt. What happens? If children were legally responsible for their parents’ debt, then their children would be required to repay their parents’ debt, and the borrowing by the parents would impose a burden on their children. However, under the law children are not legally responsible for their parents’ debt. Hence, borrowing by the parents does not directly burden the children. Does this mean that children are unaffected by their parents’ borrowing? Not necessarily. Even if the parents die in debt, their children may be affected because creditors may say: “I’m not going to lend to these children because their parents never repaid their loan, and these children may turn out to be just like their parents.” Thus, the children may judge that they have to pay off their parents’ debt in order to preserve their own ability to borrow in the future. If so, then the parents’ borrowing imposes a burden on their children. # The Burden of Government Borrowing Now consider a government. To pay for this year’s spending, suppose the government borrows instead of collecting taxes. What’s the consequence of borrowing instead of taxing? If the government collects taxes, today’s taxpayers bear the burden of this year’s spending, whereas if the government borrows, today’s taxpayers bear no burden this year. To borrow, the government sells bonds. When the bonds come due, the government can pay the old bondholders by selling new bonds to new bondholders. But in all future years, the government must pay interest to bondholders. To pay the interest, future taxpayers must pay additional taxes. Thus, the future interest payments will impose a burden on future taxpayers. Of course, future taxpayers could refuse to pay the interest. Like the children whose parents left them with unpaid debt, future taxpayers could claim that they didn’t incur the debt and therefore have no obligation to pay. But like the children, they may judge that they have to pay off their parents’ debt in order to preserve their own ability to borrow in the future. If so, then future taxpayers will have to bear the burden. Future bondholders receive the interest payments. Suppose the bondholders are foreigners—people, firms, and/or governments. Then future U.S. taxpayers pay interest to foreigners. In this case, it seems clear that government borrowing today burdens U.S. taxpayers tomorrow. Currently nearly half of U.S. government bonds are held by foreigners, so there is no doubt that nearly half of current U.S. government debt will impose an interest burden on future U.S. taxpayers. But what about interest paid to domestic bondholders? In this case interest paid by U.S. taxpayers will be received by U.S. bondholders, and it is sometimes said that...