\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency the area of the rectangle in Figure 7.8. It is often assumed that this is the entire burden of the tax, but it is not so. The tax causes the quantity to be less than socially optimal. This BAD triangle burden is in excess of the rectangle direct burden. The total burden of the tax is the revenue rectangle plus the BAD triangle. Note that in this example the ratio of the excess burden to the direct burden is $20/$400 5%. Thus, when $100 of revenue is raised, there is an additional burden of $5, so the total burden is $105. Suppose the tax were twice as great—$8 instead of $4. How much greater would the efficiency loss be? In Figure 7.8, if the tax were $8, then the quantity would be only 90 (not shown), and the area of BAD triangle would be four times as great. Why? Because the base of the triangle (the tax) would be twice as great ($8 instead of $4), and the height of the triangle (the reduction in the quantity) would also be twice as great (20 instead of 10), so the area, ½(base height), would be four times as great. Thus: The efficiency loss from a tax is proportional to the square of the tax: If the tax is doubled, the efficiency loss quadruples. Look again at Figure 7.8. Imagine the D and S curves were steeper (less elastic). Then for a particular tax wedge ($4), the efficiency loss triangle would be smaller. Clearly, both elasticities (D and S) matter for the efficiency loss. Thus: The less elastic (steeper) the D and S curves, the smaller the efficiency loss from a tax. Thus far in this chapter, elastic has simply meant “flat” and inelastic has meant “steep.” It will now be necessary to give more precise definitions. In contrast to some other economics textbooks, we define elasticity e so that it is a positive number. The elasticity of demand e is defined here as the ratio of the percentage increase in quantity demanded (% Q) over the percentage decrease in the price (% P): e ⬅ % Q/% P For example, if quantity demanded increases 5% when the price decreases 10%, then the elasticity of demand is 0.5. Note that we have defined the elasticity of demand e so that e is positive because a decrease in price causes an increase in quantity demanded. If the elasticity e is greater than 1, we say that demand is elastic, and if the elasticity e is less than 1, we say that demand is inelastic. The larger the e, the more elastic the demand; the smaller the e, the less elastic the demand. As shown in the footnote5, if the supply curve were horizontal in Figure 7.8, the area of the triangle would equal L ½t²ePQ where t is the tax rate (t equals T/P) and e is the demand elasticity.6 According to this formula, if the tax rate t doubles, the efficiency loss L quadruples; also, the lower the elasticity e, the smaller the efficiency loss. Since tax revenue R equals tPQ, then L/R ½t²ePQ/tPQ ½te. The ratio of efficiency loss L to tax revenue R equals L/R ½te 5 The area of the triangle L ½T( Q). By definition e ( Q/Q)/( P/P), so Q e( P/P)Q. Since P T, Q e(T/P)Q etQ. Then L ½T(etQ) ½(T/P)(etPQ) ½t(etPQ) ½t²ePQ. 6 If the supply curve has a positive slope as shown in Figure 7.8, then the formula is more complicated and includes the elasticity of supply as well as the elasticity of demand. A technical point: The e in the formula is the compensated demand elasticity, as explained in the appendix to Chapter 6.