\# 66 Public Finance Suppose that the cost-shares had been set in the same ratio as family incomes. If the ratio of family incomes just happened to be the same as the ratio of MBs, 3:2:1, then the cost-shares would have been the same as before ($300, $200, and $100), and once again there would have been a unanimous choice of 10 feet. This is possible; perhaps the reason for their 3:2:1 ratio of MBs was their 3:2:1 ratio of incomes. However, it is not certain. Suppose their incomes in fact were equal, and their 3:2:1 ratio of MBs was due solely to their differing attitude about the likelihood of a pirate raid; then if cost-shares were set according to income, each would pay $200 per foot, and there would be no unanimity. # A Unanimity Rule Suppose the families agree in advance that they will only order a defensive wall with a particular thickness from the construction crew if their support is unanimous—all three families support it. To achieve unanimity, they must agree to cost-shares that are in the same ratio as their MBs. Thus, if equal-dollar cost-shares are initially proposed, they will discover that they are unable to find a wall thickness that achieves unanimous support. They will therefore be compelled to alter the cost-shares and try again. Eventually they will arrive at the 3:2:1 ratio for cost-shares that achieves unanimity—all three will then support a 10-foot wall and enjoy a net benefit when it is constructed. Thus, an advantage of a unanimity rule is that it prevents an action—the building of a wall with particular thickness and with a particular cost-share ratio—in which some families do not enjoy a net benefit. The rule forces the families to keep renegotiating the cost-share ratio until they find one that enables every family to enjoy a net benefit from constructing the wall. We have implicitly assumed that the three families are honest about their MB curves and do not behave strategically. But a family might be tempted to be dishonest by understating its own MB in order to be assigned a lower cost-share. Knowing that unanimity is required, a family may hold out, refusing to support any wall proposal until the others agree to assign it a very low cost-share. If all families hold out, no wall will be built. # Majority-Rule Voting and the Median Voter Suppose the three families, in light of the deadlock that might occur with a unanimity rule, agree to decide the thickness of the wall by majority-rule voting; if two of the three families vote for a particular wall, the purchase will be made. What will happen? Each family must know its cost-share in order to know how to vote; each will decide how to vote by comparing its MB to its cost-share. Suppose initially that the cost-shares are H $300 per foot, M $200 per foot, and L $100 per foot. They agree to vote on the following question: “Should we thicken the wall by at least one more foot?” Starting from zero feet, all three vote for the first foot (because each family’s MB in Figure 3.1 exceeds its cost-share), all three vote for the second, and they continue until all three vote for the tenth. Then all three vote against the eleventh. So with these cost-shares, voters unanimously prefer a 10-foot wall. But if a family’s cost-share is raised from its dollar number given above, it will prefer less than 10 feet; if cost-share is lowered, it will prefer more. Which family will want the thickest wall? It depends on how cost-shares are assigned. Once cost-shares are assigned, the MB curves in Figure 3.1 tell how much thickness each family would prefer. Given the cost-shares, rank the three families according to their preference from thickest to thinnest.