\# Public Finance by an employer payroll tax. The tax varies somewhat according to the employer’s past experience with laying off workers—hence, it is partially experience-rated (only “partially” because if one firm has twice the layoffs of another firm, it pays less than twice the tax). Under this experience rating, employers who frequently lay off workers have to pay more tax, so that they have an incentive to try to avoid layoffs. Not all unemployed workers qualify for unemployment compensation. The worker must apply at her local unemployment insurance office and demonstrate several things in order to receive benefits. First, unemployment compensation is usually restricted to workers who are laid off due to economic conditions facing their firm; a worker who voluntarily quits her job or is fired for misconduct usually does not qualify. Second, a worker’s earnings in the preceding year must exceed a specified minimum amount; a person must therefore earn eligibility through recent employment and wage income. Third, the unemployed person must agree to look actively for work and accept any job with a wage near her previous wage. Even workers who qualify do not always claim benefits. To receive benefits, an unemployed person must first be interviewed at the unemployment insurance office. As a consequence of these restrictions and lack of full participation by eligible workers, only about half the unemployed actually receive unemployment benefits. Setting the replacement rate (currently about 40% in most states for workers with average wage income) involves a trade-off. If the replacement rate is set too low, it won’t provide enough help to unemployed people. If it is set too high, unemployed people might delay obtaining another job; it has been estimated that an increase of 10 percentage points in the replacement rate (for example, from 40% to 50%) raises the duration of unemployment between 1 and 2 weeks. Similarly, setting the time limit for benefits (currently 26 weeks) involves a trade-off. If the time limit is too low, it will expire before many of the unemployed have a chance to find work. If it is set too high, unemployed people might delay obtaining another job; one study found a spike in job finding wherever a state sets its time limit for benefits. In most economically advanced Western European countries, the replacement rate is higher and the duration of benefits is longer than in the United States. # Summary The largest federal program that assists only low-income people is Medicaid (Social Security and Medicare help people at all income levels, including poor people). Federal spending for Medicaid is nearly eight times federal spending for cash welfare. Citizens generally prefer to give low-income assistance that is restricted to a particular purpose, like medical care or food, rather than to give unrestricted cash that can be used for any purpose. This may be socially optimal if recipients are not good judges of how to maximize their family’s utility or if there are significant consumption externalities so that the utility of taxpayers is significantly affected by how their money is used by recipients. Medicaid pays poor people’s medical bills. It helps two groups: families with children and the elderly who have used up their assets paying for nursing home care. It’s an all or none program: A family either qualifies or it doesn’t; obtaining a new job can cause a family to lose Medicaid. The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a work bonus. The EITC provides assistance only to families that earn income from work. Initially, the more wage income that is earned, the greater is the EITC until a maximum is reached; then as further income is earned, the EITC is gradually phased out. The dollar amount of the EITC at each level of income depends on the number of children. A household receives its EITC annually.