\# Chapter 4 Cost-Benefit Analysis **Summary** In this chapter we saw how cost-benefit analysis can be helpful in arriving at better decisions in the public sector. A project should be undertaken if its benefit to society exceeds its cost to society; moreover, the scale of such a project should be increased as long as the marginal social benefit (MSB) exceeds the marginal social cost (MSC) so that the optimal scale occurs where the marginal social benefit equals the marginal social cost. Private firms and individuals often use cost-benefit analysis. Firm managers compare the cost of a new factory or machine to its benefit (the increase in future profits), and individuals compare the cost of higher education or training to its benefit (the increase in future earnings). The principles of cost-benefit analysis therefore apply to firms, individuals, and government. When a firm considers building another factory, the firm must compare the cost of building the factory with the benefit—the additional profit that can be made by producing and selling more. Specifically, the firm should compare the present value (PV) of the increase in future profits to the cost. The benefit of building a highway is what drivers would be willing to pay to use the highway in all future years. Highways save drivers time. It would be possible to estimate how many hours are saved; putting a dollar value on the time saved yields an estimate of the benefits of the highway because this is what drivers should be willing to pay to use the highway. The benefit of building the highway safer is the reduction in deaths and injuries. People reveal their preference by how much they actually pay in the marketplace to reduce their chance of dying. They pay by buying a good or service that reduces the chance of dying or by choosing a lower-paying job because it is less dangerous. Alternatively, a survey can be administered that asks people how much they would pay. Mistakes to avoid when doing cost-benefit analysis include counting jobs created as a benefit, double counting the same benefit, and counting secondary benefits. The benefit of reducing carbon emissions is how much people would be willing to pay to reduce future global warming. Emissions should be cut back as long as the marginal cost of cutback is less than the marginal benefit. To compare future benefits to current costs, the benefits must be converted to present value by discounting using the social discount rate. One difficult and important application of cost-benefit analysis concerns whether the government should pay for a costly medical treatment. Advances in technology, medication, and medical procedures have made it possible to cure medical conditions that previously could not be treated, but often the new technology, medication, or procedure is expensive. Economists prescribe a weighing of the benefit of the treatment against its cost. The issue is not “life versus money” but rather how best to use resources to promote the well-being of people. A military intervention should be subjected to cost-benefit analysis. Although an estimate of the benefit must rely on the disciplines of history, international relations, political science, and military science, economists can provide an estimate of the cost. In particular, economists can make sure that costs outside the military budget are counted and that an aggregate cost estimate is translated into a cost per person, so that each citizen can grasp cost against perceived benefit. An interesting application of cost-benefit analysis is the 2003 U.S. military intervention in Iraq.