\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance # FIGURE 1.6 A Subsidy to Consumers The demand curve shifts up. $14 $12 S = $4 $10 S = $4 D′ $8 D Q 100 110 In Figure 1.5, a subsidy of $4 per unit given to producers decreases their MC by $4 because the producer receives $4 from the government for each unit sold. This shifts down their supply curve $4 to S⬘, so the market moves to the intersection of S⬘ and D, increasing the quantity from 100 to 110. Note that the consumer pays a price of $8 to the producer who also receives $4 from the government. In Figure 1.6, a subsidy of $4 per unit given to consumers increases the price they are willing to pay producers by $4 because the consumer receives $4 from the government for each unit bought. This shifts up their demand curve $4 to D⬘, so the market moves to the intersection of D⬘ and S, increasing the quantity from 100 to 110. Note that the consumer pays a price of $12 to the producer and receives a subsidy of $4 from the government. Whether the $4 subsidy is given to producers or consumers, it causes the same increase in quantity from 100 to 110 and therefore the same amount of inefficiency. The magnitude of the inefficiency from the $4 per unit subsidy (whether given to producers or consumers) equals the area of the triangle BAD in Figure 1.7. Why? Starting at 110 units (the quantity under the subsidy), for each unit less there would be a net gain to society equal to the vertical distance MC-MB; no further net gains would be possible once MC equals MB. Adding the vertical distances MC-MB, unit by unit, yields the area of the triangle BAD. The subsidy prevents this net gain, BAD, from taking place, so the area of the BAD triangle equals the inefficiency from the subsidy. In this example, the inefficiency is $20 because ½ (base ⫻ height) ⫽ ½ ($4 ⫻ 10). Instead of the $4 tax, suppose the government imposed a regulation limiting the quantity to 90. Then the inefficiency would be the same as under the $4 tax and would be equal to the area of the triangle BAD in Figure 1.4. Instead of the $4 subsidy, suppose the government imposed a regulation requiring a quantity of 110. Then the inefficiency would be the same as under the $4 subsidy and would be equal to the area of the triangle BAD in Figure 1.7. It is important to emphasize that a tax, subsidy, or regulation causes an inefficiency whenever the free market would generate just the right quantity for consumers. The free market does this for most goods and services. However, it does not do it for all goods and services. When it doesn’t, the proper tax, or subsidy, or regulation, would increase,