\# Public Finance # FIGURE 4.1 # The Optimal Scale of an Investment Project The scale where MSB equals MSC is socially optimal. The optimal scale of an investment project is shown in Figure 4.1. At any scale of the project less than Q\*, the MSB exceeds the MSC so it is socially optimal to increase the scale another unit. At any scale of the project greater than Q\*, the MSB is less than the MSC so it is socially optimal to decrease the scale another unit. Hence, the optimal scale is Q\*. The challenge comes in measuring and comparing the marginal social benefit, which comes in the future, to the marginal social cost, which occurs in the present. In discussing cost-benefit analysis, economists and others often drop the word marginal and simply say that an investment should be undertaken as long as the benefit exceeds the cost. We follow this convention by usually omitting the word marginal. Remember, however, that the question is not simply whether a project should be undertaken but also whether the scale (quantity or quality) of the project is optimal. Finding the optimal scale involves comparing the marginal benefit from raising the quantity or quality an additional (marginal) unit with the marginal cost of that additional unit. Some noneconomists have criticized cost-benefit analysis because they believe it is unethical to weigh a benefit such as a life saved or a reduction in global warming against money—its cost. But cost, though measured in money, means opportunity cost—the benefit that could have been enjoyed by using the resources to produce other goods and services. Thus, cost-benefit analysis is a means of comparing the benefit from one project to the benefit people could have enjoyed by using the resources to make other goods or services. # COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS Private firms and individuals use cost-benefit analysis all the time. Firm managers compare the cost of a new factory or machine to its benefit: the increase in future profits. Individuals compare the cost of higher education or training to its benefit: the increase in future earnings. The principles of cost-benefit analysis therefore apply to firms, individuals, and government. Whoever is weighing cost against benefit faces