\# Chapter 4 Cost-Benefit Analysis to the city where she works. When the commuter decides the price to offer the seller for the home, she may think about commuting in traffic or calculate what she could earn at work or think about spending time with her children; what she chooses to think about may affect the price she offers and the actual price at which the home is purchased. The order in which a consumer confronts goods at a department store or in a catalog may also affect willingness to pay and what the consumer purchases. If a consumer enters the store at one end or reads the catalog from the beginning, she may buy one set of goods; if she enters the store at the other end or reads a catalog from the end, she may buy another set of goods. A consumer’s purchasing behavior may also be very different depending on whether she can use a credit card or must pay cash. A consumer may buy certain goods or services not because she gets direct utility from it but because she thinks others will approve of her behavior. Supporters of contingent valuation contend that techniques are improving based on experience conducting surveys. Survey research is a field that must be taken seriously and treated rigorously: The design of the sample, the conducting of interviews, and the framing of questions all affect responses. Respondents must be asked about specific and realistic situations, not abstractions. Instead of asking, “What would you pay to prevent pollution in bays and harbors?” ask, “What would you pay for a new program that would limit damage from any future oil spill in the bay or harbor nearest to where you live?” To get respondents to take the questions seriously, they might be informed that the government is likely to use the results of the survey to decide whether to undertake the program in question. Polls like these are often used by news outlets to evaluate the benefit or popularity of proposed legislation. # Hypothetical Questions and Answers to Noncommercial Drivers Similar questions can be asked to noncommercial drivers whose purpose is recreation, visiting friends, or vacation. For example, “How much would you pay to reduce by an hour your travel time for recreation, visiting friends, or vacation?” To evaluate a particular highway project, it would be useful to ask drivers about specific trips that could actually be made more quickly by the proposed highway. # Benefits of Improving the Safety of a Highway Back to the new highway: Not all benefits can be measured by time saved. Compare the safety of three highways. Highway C has a single narrow lane in each direction with no guardrail or shoulder. Highway B has two narrow lanes in each direction with a guardrail and narrow shoulders. Highway A has several wide lanes in each direction, the two directions are separated by guardrails and substantial distance, and there are wide shoulders. The safer the highway, the greater the cost of building it. So which should be built? The benefit of building the highway safer is the reduction in deaths and injuries. We must determine how this benefit can be valued so it can be compared to the cost. How can a value be put on lives saved and injuries avoided? Some people object to putting a specific dollar value on lives saved, but a decision about which highway to build must still be made. For many economists, the sensible thing to do is to try to put an approximate value on lives saved, which can then be compared to the cost in order to help make a sensible decision. The methods for putting some sort of value on lives saved are the same as discussed above for putting a value on time saved commuting: increased output, actual market behavior (revealed preference), and hypothetical questions and answers (contingent valuation).