\# Chapter 1 Introduction to Public Finance not bought protection. Moreover, the best way to protect adjacent homeowners who have paid for fire protection would be to extinguish the fire. Knowing this, some selfish consumers would take their chance of not buying protection, counting on receiving protection should their home catch fire. If there are too many selfish consumers, then too many won’t pay and the fire company will not be able to afford the personnel and equipment to provide adequate protection. Economists call a good or service a public good if it is hard to exclude someone who refuses to pay from benefiting and if one person’s consumption doesn’t diminish consumption by others. Military protection against foreign attack, police protection against criminals, and firefighter protection against home fires are all public goods. As we will see in Chapter 3, most analysts agree that the government should intervene by levying taxes to acquire the funds to buy the public good from a private firm or to produce the service itself. # Social Insurance: Chapters 5 and 6 Whereas virtually all economists agree that government intervention is warranted for externalities and public goods, economists disagree about social insurance. By social insurance we mean old age insurance, health insurance, unemployment insurance, disability insurance, and workplace-injury insurance (workers’ compensation). Some economists think social insurance should be left to the private market with little or no government intervention, while other economists think government should play a major role in the provision of social insurance. Economists who support government intervention disagree about the kind of intervention. Here we will comment on old age insurance in Chapter 5 and health insurance in Chapter 6. # Old Age Insurance Some economists believe that preparing for old age should be left to the market; they contend that individuals should be free to choose how much of their income to consume and how much to save. Each person in middle age should take responsibility for preparing for retirement by saving enough each year to build an adequate retirement fund. Once retired, the person should use the retirement fund to buy old age insurance (an annuity) from a private insurance company which would then make monthly payments to the person for as long as he lives. Individuals who choose to consume more while they are young should have to accept the consequences of consuming less when they are old. If someone arrives at old age without enough funds to subsist, perhaps government should provide a minimum welfare payment to enable subsistence just as it might for younger poor people, but government should not operate a special old age insurance program. Economists who favor government intervention for old age insurance believe it is unrealistic to expect everyone to prepare adequately for retirement. True, some people could have prepared for retirement but chose instead to live and spend lavishly while young; these lavish spenders do not deserve help. However, many would be inadequately prepared for retirement through no fault of their own. Some may have lost their career job in middle age because of a decline in demand for their company’s product and had to take another job with a much lower wage during their last decade of work. Some may have suffered a serious health problem that prevented them from working and caused them to withdraw their savings. Some may have worked hard full time throughout their career, but their low economic aptitude kept them from earning enough to save adequately for retirement. Some may have saved adequately but suffered bad luck on their investments.