\# 218 Public Finance Although a separate corporate income tax succeeds in taxing profits that are retained, it causes profits that are paid out as dividends to be taxed twice. First the corporation pays a tax on all profit (whether the profit is destined to be retained or paid out), and second the individuals who receive dividends from the corporation pay taxes on their dividend income.10 Congress could eliminate this double taxation of dividends by permitting corporations to deduct dividends the way they are permitted to deduct interest payments before applying the corporate tax rate to compute their corporate income tax. Congress has chosen not to let corporations deduct dividends. Another justification for a corporate income tax is that the corporate legal form confers a benefit on its owners that is not enjoyed by owners of proprietorships and partnerships—namely, limited liability. It is argued that it is therefore fair and appropriate to levy a separate corporate income tax. Of course, there is still another expedient rationale for a corporate income tax: Corporations have the ability to pay substantial taxes. Finally, there is a rationale that is based on a fallacy. Some citizens mistakenly think that a separate corporate income tax reduces the tax burden on people by placing the burden on business firms. But it is people, not business firms, who ultimately bear the burden of all taxes. If a tax is levied on corporations, particular people will bear the burden: If corporations reduce dividends or stock prices fall, stockholders will bear a burden; if managers or employees receive less compensation, they will bear a burden; if corporations raise prices, consumers will bear a burden; if financial investors shift funds out of corporations to unincorporated business firms, owners of incorporated firms will receive a lower return and bear a burden. Thus, a corporate income tax does not reduce the tax burden on people. Instead, it shifts the tax burden from certain groups of people to other groups of people. # Determining a Corporation’s Income Tax How does a corporation determine its income tax? Business income equals sales revenue minus the cost of goods sold this year. We discussed the elements of cost in the section, “Business Income.” Compensation (cash wages and salaries plus fringe benefits such as purchase of health insurance coverage or contributions to pensions) to employees, expense on materials (intermediate product) used up making the final product, interest paid to creditors (note once again that dividends are not deductible as a cost), and the depreciation of capital goods are all costs of goods sold this year. The corporate tax rate is then applied to this income. Like the household income tax, there are tax brackets. Large corporations are in a 35% tax bracket. Applying the rates yields the corporation’s tax. Who bears the burden of the corporate income tax? In the short run, after-tax profit would fall, reducing dividends and the price of corporate stock so the owners of corporate capital would bear a burden. In the long run, financial investors would direct less funds into corporations and more funds into unincorporated business, so the return to capital elsewhere would be driven down; hence, owners of capital throughout the economy, not just in the corporate sector, would bear a burden. Economists therefore usually assume that owners of capital bear the burden of the corporate income tax.11 But if the lower 10 Note that labor income is also taxed twice—once by the payroll tax and once by the individual income tax. 11 It is possible that corporate managers and employees would receive less pay than they otherwise would have; if so, they would bear some burden. Also, corporations might be able to pass on some of the tax to consumers by raising prices.