\# 52 Public Finance for both H and L would be $20. Thus, the total cost of cutting back 50 would equal 50 ⫻ $20 ⫽ $1,000. In this example, the total cost if H alone cuts back 50 would be 5 times ($5,000 vs. $1,000) the total cost if the cutback of 50 is shared optimally between H and L. Thus, to minimize total cost, all countries should levy the same carbon tax and share in the cutback until each country’s MAC equals the tax. Any treaty that exempts any countries from levying the tax raises the cost of achieving a given reduction in global warming. However, low-income countries make two points. First, they note that high-income countries have emitted most of the carbon over the past two centuries and are responsible for most of the buildup thus far. Second, they say they have a right to grow their economies to improve the standard of living of their people. Is there any way to address these objections of low-income countries while heeding economists’ point that all firms in all countries must face the same price to minimize the total cost of reducing world emissions? The answer is yes. It can be done if high-income countries are willing to compensate low-income countries, through revenue transfers, for agreeing to implement the carbon tax. Consider one way this can be done. Each country would decide whether to participate in an international carbon tax treaty. Under the treaty, the country would agree to levy the specified carbon tax—for example, $40 per ton—on all domestic emitters (the magnitude of the tax would be set by treaty participants). Each country would keep its own tax revenue and either return the revenue to its own population by cutting other taxes or use it to finance its own government programs. Then under a formula based on country per capita income (also set by treaty participants), participating countries with high per capita incomes would contribute revenue that would then be distributed to participating countries with low per capita incomes. For example, the United States would be one of the countries contributing revenue, and China would be one of the countries receiving revenue. In our H and L example, consider a treaty where each government H and L would agree to levy a tax of $40 on its own polluters. Even if country L has no benefit from the reduction in global warming, L should agree to levy this tax on its own polluters if country H pays country L at least $800. Why? Because the cost to country L of cutting back 40 is $800 (the MAC of the 40th unit cut back is $40, so the average MAC is $20, so $20 ⫻ 40 ⫽ $800). Should country H be willing to pay country L $800? It depends on how much benefit country H expects to receive from the reduction in global warming. In response to the $40 tax, H would cut back 10 (from 50 to 40), so the cost of cutback to H’s economy is $200 (because the MAC of the 10th unit cut back is $40, so the average MAC is $20, so $20 ⫻ 10 ⫽ $200). Thus, the cost of cutback plus the payment to country L equals $1,000 ($200 ⫹ $800). As long as country H believes its benefit from reducing global warming exceeds $1,000, it should be willing to pay L $800 to participate in the treaty. If country L believes it would get some benefit from a reduction in global warming, then L should be willing to join the treaty for a payment from H that is less than $800. For example, if L believes its benefit would be $200, it should be willing to join the treaty if H pays it $600 because its total benefit ($200 ⫹ $600) would cover its cost of cutback ($800). One thing is for certain: It is better for H to cost-reimburse L in order to get L to help with the cutback rather than for H to do all the cutting back by itself.