\# Chapter 5 Social Security full faith and credit of the U.S. government and have the same degree of safety as U.S. government bonds held by households and business firms. After 2040, when the Trust Fund runs out of bonds, the chief actuary estimates that payroll tax revenue will be sufficient to finance a monthly benefit equal to about 70% of that scheduled under the current benefit formula. This post-2040 benefit will be a bit larger (after adjusting for inflation) than today’s benefit because the growth of real, inflation-adjusted wages between now and 2040 will make the scheduled (inflation-adjusted) benefit in 2040 about 50% larger than today (70% of 1.5 is greater than 1). Nevertheless, if nothing is done before 2040, the abrupt 30% drop in the monthly benefit that would occur when the Trust Fund runs out of bonds would be extremely undesirable. Steps can and should be taken as soon as possible to ensure that there will never be such an abrupt, large drop in the Social Security monthly benefit. The 2040 problem is shown in the two graphs of Figure 5.4. The top graph shows projected total benefits that will be paid out under Social Security’s current benefit formula (line BF) and projected total payroll tax revenue that will be coming in under Social Security’s current tax rate (line TG). The bottom graph shows the amount accumulated in the Trust Fund. Total outgoing benefits rise not only with total wage incomes (because the formula links scheduled benefits to wage histories) but also with the number of retirees. Because of the retirement of the large number of baby boomers, but also because retirees are expected to live longer, outgoing benefits are projected to rise more rapidly than incoming taxes. From 2000 until about 2020, taxes exceed benefits, but after 2020 taxes are below benefits. Still, from 2020 to about 2030, incoming taxes plus interest on the U.S. government bonds held by the Trust Fund will exceed outgoing benefits, so these benefits can be paid, and the amount in the Trust Fund will keep increasing. But after 2030, taxes plus interest will become less than scheduled benefits—to pay these scheduled benefits, the Trust Fund will have to exchange (redeem) its bonds for cash from the U.S. Treasury to supplement taxes plus interest. This will cause the bonds in the Trust Fund to decline from a peak in 2030 to zero in about 2040. It should be emphasized that Social Security will impose a cash-flow burden on the U.S. Treasury starting in 2020. Prior to 2020, each year the payroll tax that the Treasury collects exceeds the benefits that it pays retirees, so it enjoys a cash surplus each year due to the Social Security program. After 2020, the payroll tax that the Treasury collects is less than the benefits it pays retirees, so it suffers a cash burden from the Social Security program; it must come up with additional cash each year due to Social Security. Thus, from the Treasury’s perspective, the key year will be 2020, not 2040, because that’s when Social Security will switch from providing the Treasury with a cash surplus each year to imposing a cash burden each year. After 2040, if tax rates are unchanged, benefits actually paid out will have to be cut abruptly by 30% in order to equal incoming taxes (assuming that the Social Security Trust Fund is not permitted to borrow funds). # Slowing Benefit Growth and/or Raising Payroll Tax Growth To prevent this abrupt benefit cut after 2040, the government can slow benefit growth and raise payroll tax growth beginning in 2010. Look at how this would alter Figure 5.4. In the top graph, the growth path of the benefits line would rotate down from BF, for example to BG, and the taxes line would rotate up from TG, for example to TF, so that in 2040 benefits paid out would be less than taxes coming in (instead of greater than taxes) by the amount FG. Social Security would still be providing the Treasury with a