\# Public Finance # Actual Market Behavior (Revealed Preference) Another approach to measuring the benefits of time saved is to look at commuter location preferences. Prior to the building of the highway, suppose we observe two homes in two different suburbs of the city, and each home is inhabited by a commuter who works in the city. The two homes are identical, and the suburban towns are identical; the only difference between the homes is the difference in commuting time to work (an hour a day for a roundtrip). The commuter in the home closer to the city actually paid $20,000 more for her home than the other commuter. It might then be argued that the actual payment of two different prices for the two homes “reveals” the value of time saved. Dividing $20,000 by the number of hours saved over a career of commuting yields an estimate of the value of an hour. Of course, the conditions described above—identical homes, identical towns—seldom hold. Home prices differ because of differences in many factors, only one of which is commuter time. Given this reality, what can be done? Economists recommend using actual data to try to quantify the relationship between all these factors and home prices. Looking at actual data on the price of homes that differ in rooms, square feet, neighborhood safety, schools, and so on, as well as commuter time, economists can fit a regression equation to the actual data to provide a quantitative estimate of how much each factor affects the price of a home. By controlling for the impact of other factors in this way, it is possible to estimate the effect of commuter time on the price of a home and therefore assign a value to the benefit of saved time. # Hypothetical Questions and Answers (Contingent Valuation) Another way to put a dollar value on time saved is to ask drivers hypothetical questions. A survey can be administered that asks commuters how much they would be willing to pay to reduce their daily commute one hour. This method is called contingent valuation because the question is hypothetical—the respondent knows she will not actually have to make the payment. Supporters of this method contend that it directly elicits the information needed and that survey results can be a reasonably reliable guide to how much individuals would pay if the choice were actual rather than hypothetical. Critics contend that the surveys produce unreliable results. They note that the answers may be sensitive to the exact wording, presentation, and context of the questions. For example, consider the following four ways of asking about the dollar value of saving an hour commuting:

1. How much would you pay to reduce your daily commute one hour?
2. Considering traffic, how much would you pay to reduce your daily commute one hour?
3. Considering what you could earn at work, how much would you pay to reduce your daily commute one hour?
4. Considering the time you could spend with your children, how much would you pay to reduce your daily commute one hour?

It is possible that despite the different wording most respondents would give roughly the same answer. It is also possible that the different wording would elicit substantially different answers. If so, which answer should be regarded as the best measure of benefit? Supporters of contingent valuation reply that actual market behavior is also subject to similar problems. Consider the price that a commuter is willing to pay for a home closer.