\# Chapter 5 Social Security The official name for the Social Security program is Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI)—the combined 12.4% pays for OASDI. Each employee pays 5.3% for the OAS program and 0.9% for the DI program for a total of 6.2%, so of the combined 12.4%, 10.6% is for OAS and 1.8% is for DI. Thus, Social Security provides benefits to workers who become disabled as well as to retirees. It should be noted that there is an additional combined 2.9% (legally 1.45% on the employer, 1.45% on the worker) on all wage income (no ceiling) that pays for Medicare’s hospital insurance (HI). So in 2008, if a worker making $102,000 examines his pay stubs, he will see that an additional $1,479 (1.45%) has been taken out of his paychecks over the year for Medicare HI; he will not see the other $1,479 that the employer legally owes for Medicare and sends to the government. Note that if the worker made twice as much ($204,000), then twice as much would have been taken out for Medicare but nothing more for Social Security (because of the $102,000 ceiling). # Social Security Eligibility A person must work and pay payroll tax for 40 quarters (10 years) to be eligible to collect Social Security benefits. The earliest age at which a person can begin collecting monthly benefits—the earliest eligibility age (EEA)—is 62, but if the person chooses to wait until an older age to start, the monthly benefit will be larger. Once a person starts, he will receive a monthly annuity payment—a payment that continues until death no matter how long he lives. An annuity provides insurance against outliving one’s savings. Once a person has started receiving a monthly benefit, each year the person’s monthly payment is increased automatically with price inflation in the economy—for example, if inflation was 3% last year, then this year the person’s monthly payment will be automatically set 3% higher than last year. The amount of the monthly benefit depends on the person’s wage history—specifically, on the worker’s average indexed monthly earnings (AIME). To compute a worker’s AIME, the government doesn’t simply average the person’s annual wage incomes because wage incomes were much lower years ago. Instead, the government takes a person’s wage income in each past year and “multiplies it up” to adjust for the average rise in wage incomes in the economy since that year. Then it takes the average of these adjusted annual wage incomes and divides by 12 to put it on a monthly basis. The result is called the person’s AIME. It is important to emphasize that there is a feature of AIME that limits the Social Security benefit of a worker with high wage income and thereby contributes to the progressivity of the Social Security benefit formula. In computing a high-income person’s AIME over his career, only monthly wage income up to a ceiling—the same ceiling that limits how much he was taxed for Social Security—is used; hence, wage income above this ceiling is not counted either for Social Security taxes or benefits. Thus, the AIME of a person with high wage income is less than the person’s actual average monthly wage income—for a very high-income person, it is much less. Just as the wage of a high-income person is taxed only up to a ceiling, so the benefit of a high-income person is computed by counting in AIME only his monthly wage income up to that same ceiling. # Progressive Benefit Formula The retiree’s monthly benefit, also called the retiree’s primary insurance amount (PIA), is based on his AIME. Instead of making a person’s PIA a flat percentage of his AIME, Congress long ago enacted a progressive benefit formula.