\# 100 Public Finance In the form of a bank account, bonds, or stocks, individuals can build up wealth in a home by gradually paying off the debt initially needed to buy the home. Move to the right in the second row to the second column of Table 5.1. Could each generation save for its own retirement collectively? It’s possible, although it has seldom been attempted. Under this method, the government would tax all workers and save the revenue by putting it in a savings account or by buying bonds or stocks, earning interest, dividends, or capital gains, respectively. When workers retire, the government would gradually draw down the bank account or sell the bonds or stocks and use the cash to pay benefits to retirees to finance their consumption. Collectively, each generation would be saving for and financing its own retirement. # The Rate of Return In each of the four ways of preparing for retirement, there is a rate of return for the typical worker. What is the rate of return? In any retirement system, a worker makes a sacrifice during the work stage of life and receives a benefit in the retirement stage. In a government system, the worker’s sacrifice is a tax; in a private system, the worker’s sacrifice is a contribution to a retirement fund. Think of each stage as having a length of 30 years. The rate of return compares the person’s benefit in retirement to the sacrifice that person made as a worker. For example, suppose a worker sacrifices $100 while working and then receives a benefit of $150 in retirement. The benefit exceeds the sacrifice by $50, so the ratio of the gain ($50) to the sacrifice ($100) is 50%—hence, the rate of return (on the sacrifice) is 50%. So the rate of return r\* is defined as: (B₂ - T₁) / T₁ r\* = (B₂ - T₁) / T₁ where B₂ is the person’s benefit as a retiree (in the second stage of life) and T₁ is the sacrifice that person made as a worker (in the first stage of life). As indicated above, there are two equivalent formulas for the rate of return. From the first, r\* = ($150 - $100) / $100 = 50%; from the second, r\* = ($150 / $100) - 1 = (1.5) - 1 = 0.5 = 50%. As long as B₂ is greater than T₁, the rate of return r\* is positive. This simple example and definition assume that the worker makes one sacrifice T₁ and receives one benefit B₂. Note that r\* is the rate of return per period where a period is 30 years; the rate of return over 30 years is a much larger percentage than an annual rate of return—the rate of return per year. To simplify our analysis in this section:

* We assume that there are two stages of life of equal length: work and retirement;
* T₁ is the sacrifice made in the work stage and B₂ is the benefit received in the retirement stage.

\# Rate of Return When Workers Support Retirees In the first row of the table, workers support retirees. Imagine that you’re a worker, and you make a contribution T₁. Now you retire. What determines the benefit you receive? The more workers there are to support you and the higher the wage of those workers, the higher will be your benefit. That’s true whether worker support is individual (within each family) or collective, but we focus specifically on the collective case. There are two things that will raise your benefit B₂ relative to your sacrifice T₁. First, faster growth in the labor force, so that as workers retire, a greater number of workers replace.