\# Public Finance less inefficiency than source-based taxes that discourage economic activity (working, investing, and shopping) in the city. Despite the inefficiency of source-based taxation, it does succeed in shifting some of the city’s tax burden to outsiders. However, it would clearly be better to achieve a redistribution of funds from outsiders to insiders without imposing significant distortions in the location of economic activity in the region. # Should a City Set a High Tax Rate on Affluent Residents? It is tempting for low-income residents of a city to support high tax rates on affluent residents (through a progressive personal income tax or progressive residential property tax), but it may prove counterproductive. The higher the tax rate on affluent residents, the greater the number of affluent people who will move to the suburbs. Once again, the question is how elastic is this response. If the response is inelastic, then setting a high tax rate on the affluent may benefit the city’s low-income residents. But if the response is elastic, then setting a high tax rate may reduce the number of affluent people sufficiently to reduce city revenue and hence public services for low-income residents. # The Role of State Government When People Separate by Income State government has the capacity to redistribute income from high- to low-income localities because it can tax households wherever they reside within the state. This doesn’t mean that the state must engage in geographic taxation where it taxes people in some geographic localities but not others. The state need only levy an income tax or a sales tax on all state residents and businesses. Under either tax, high-income people pay more dollars in tax than low-income people. The revenue raised can be channeled to low-income people throughout the state or to cities with a large population of low-income people. The mechanism is for the state to give grants to local governments according to criteria that favor low-income communities. State taxing and transferring through grants to local governments can achieve a net redistribution from high- to low-income people. # State Redistribution to Cities That Benefits High-Income Suburbanites At first glance, it might seem that self-interested, high-income suburbanites should oppose any redistribution by state government, but this is not so. Most high-income suburbanites are affected by conditions in their city. Many work in the city. Many would like to go into the city to eat at restaurants; go to concerts, shows, and museums; attend professional sporting events; go shopping; and stroll in public parks. They have a stake in public safety in the sections of the city where they want to go and the routes to and from these city destinations. Moreover, suburbanites benefit from the agglomeration economies that the city makes possible. Agglomeration economies are the gains in efficiency which come from having many firms and workers close to one another. A high density of firms within the same industry leads to lower shipping costs for the firms’ inputs and outputs. A high density of firms in different industries enables a rapid transmission of a technological breakthrough in one industry to spread to another and enables efficient shopping by consumers. High density provides insurance protection against unemployment: Lose a job at one firm, and there is a good chance to find another from the many firms close by. Suburbanites are harmed if low-income city residents can’t contribute enough tax revenue to pay for adequate police and fire protection in the areas of the city where suburbanites work or want to visit (which we will call “center city”). If center city schools are underfunded, youngsters may drop out and become street criminals who