\# Chapter 4 Cost-Benefit Analysis # Case Study The 2003 U.S. Military Intervention in Iraq In summer 2002, the Bush administration challenged Iraq’s dictator Saddam Hussein to dismantle his program for developing weapons of mass destruction (chemical, biological, and nuclear) or face military consequences. Preparations for a U.S. military intervention in Iraq took place in fall and winter 2002; in spring 2003, the United States and several allies invaded Iraq and ousted Saddam Hussein from power. In May 2003, with U.S. combat deaths at about 150 people, President Bush declared major combat operations to be over. U.S. military forces, however, remained in Iraq to try to maintain stability. In December 2003, Saddam Hussein was captured by U.S. forces. Continuing resistance from insurgents took a steady toll of U.S. soldiers. By July 2004, cumulative U.S. combat deaths approached 1,000. The U.S. military pacification of Iraq has continued to the present with cumulative U.S. combat deaths passing 4,000. In September 2002, as the Bush administration prepared for a military intervention in Iraq, economist Lawrence Lindsey, the head of President Bush’s National Economic Council, publicly estimated that the cost of such an intervention might be roughly $150 billion (Lindsey said between $100 and $200 billion).¹ The Bush administration (the White House and Defense Department) quickly disagreed with Lindsey and estimated the cost of an intervention as only about 30% of Lindsey’s estimate (the administration said less than $50 billion—we’ll infer $45 billion) based on the experience of the Unites States’ 1991 removal of Saddam Hussein’s Iraqi military from Kuwait and the United States’ post-9/11 attack on the ruling terrorist-supporting Taliban (who had been hosting Osama bin Laden’s Al-Qaeda training camps) in Afghanistan. These aggregate numbers were not translated to cost per person at the time, but it is worth noting here that Lindsey’s cost of $150 billion (1 billion is 10⁹) translates to $500 per person (because with 300 million Americans, $150 ⴛ 10⁹ divided by 300 ⴛ 10⁶ equals 0.5 ⴛ 10³ or $500). The estimate of the Bush administration was therefore that the cost per person would be 30% of $500, or $150 per person ($45 ⴛ 10⁹ divided by 300 ⴛ 10⁶ equals 0.15 ⴛ 10³ or $150). # NORDHAUS In late 2002, Yale economist William Nordhaus published a much higher estimate—40 times as great.² The main reason for the huge difference is that Nordhaus rejected a “quick victory” scenario. Nordhaus conceded that a quick victory would involve a cost of about $100 billion (halfway between Lindsey’s estimate and the administration’s estimate)—roughly twice the administration’s estimate of $45 billion; on a per person basis, roughly $300 per person instead of the administration’s $150 per person. He contended that it was likely that the intervention would be followed by “a prolonged conflict and nasty outcomes” due to a long-lasting resistance against the U.S. military occupation. He presented a table with numerical cost estimates showing “the array of costs that might be incurred if the war drags on, occupation is lengthy, nation-building is costly, the war destroys a large part of Iraq’s oil infrastructure, there is lingering military and political resistance in the Islamic world to U.S. occupation, and there are major adverse psychological reactions to the conflict.” He estimated a cost of $1.9 trillion—$1,900 billion, or 19 times greater than the $100 billion cost of a quick victory and about 40 times the administration’s estimate of $45 billion. Translated to a cost per person, Nordhaus’s estimate is roughly $6,000 per person, because with 300 million Americans, $1,900 ⴛ 10⁹ divided by 300 ⴛ 10⁶ equals 6.3 ⴛ 10³ or roughly $6,000 per person—40 times the administration’s estimate of $150 per person. # WALLSTEN AND KOSEC In mid-2006, Scott Wallsten and Katrina Kosec, two analysts at the American Enterprise Institute, noted that while the U.S. federal budgetary cost of the Iraq war and pacification over the three years since the invasion had cost about $300 billion, they estimated that the full economic cost of the war as of mid-2006 was about $500 billion—half a trillion.³ An important cost omitted from the budget is the cost of death and injuries. Based on studies by Harvard economist Kip Viscusi on the value of a statistical life (VSL), they assigned a cost of $7.5 million to each.