\# 64 Public Finance # POLITICAL ECONOMY How should the three island families decide whether to purchase a defense wall? We now turn to political economy—how the families might collectively make decisions concerning the public good. # Political Economy on the Island If the construction ship crew foolishly approaches each family alone with a price of $600 per foot, it will be disappointed. Each family alone (even H) would be unwilling to buy even a 1-foot wall if it must pay the entire $600 per foot itself, because as can be seen in Figure 3.1, no family’s MB curve is as high as $600 even for the first foot. At zero feet, even H’s MB curve is below the MC of $600. It is important to recognize that H’s MB curve might have been higher, so that at zero feet, H’s MB curve might have been above the MC of $600. If this had been the case, then H alone would have been willing to pay for at least a 1-foot wall, even if H were charged the entire MC of $600. Thus, it is possible that a single buyer would be willing to pay more than the MC for a certain quantity of a public good. A good example of this is discussed in the box on a particular global public good: the military protection of a valuable world resource. If the construction crew is sensible, it will ask the three families to get together and decide what they would collectively be willing to do. Assume that the families get along well and are glad to cooperate. Also assume each family is honest (you certainly are) and tells the others the truth about its own MB curve. Then the families sit down and together draw Figure 3.1. Suppose the families agree that, since their MBs are in the ratio of 3:2:1, they will share the cost in the ratio of 3:2:1. In other words, costs will be shared in the same ratio as benefits. Since the price per foot is $600, they agree that H will pay $300 per foot; M, $200; and L, $100; each family’s horizontal cost-share line is shown in Figure 3.1. The cost-share is the price that the family must pay per unit of the public good. With cost-shares decided, each family looks at its own MB curve, compares the height of its MB at each foot of thickness to its cost-share (price), and decides how thick a wall it would want. Note that each family’s MB curve is its demand curve, because at each price that the family faces (its cost-share), the curve tells how many feet of thickness the family would want to buy (demand). Every family would decide that it wants a wall 10 feet thick; up until 10 feet, each family’s MB exceeds its cost-share, but beyond 10 feet, each family’s MB is less than its cost-share. Pleased and relieved that they unanimously prefer a 10-foot-thick wall, they inform the construction crew. The 10-foot-thick wall is constructed and purchased collectively by the families, and each family enjoys a net benefit from the wall because, for each foot of thickness built, each family’s MB exceeds its cost-share; moreover, had another foot (the 11th) been built, each family’s MB would have been less than its cost-share, so 10 feet was the best wall for all three families given their cost-shares. This happy outcome—the unanimous choice of the socially optimal (efficient) quantity of the public good—depended on several things. First, the families had to cooperate. Second, they had to be honest about their own MBs. Third, they had to agree to share the cost in the same ratio as their MBs. Suppose instead that the families had agreed to equal-dollar cost-shares so each would pay $200 per foot. Then from Figure 3.1, H would have wanted more than 10 feet, while L would have wanted less. So there would have been no unanimity.