\# 232 Public Finance # A Household Rebate with a RST or a VAT Another way to reduce the regressivity of a RST or a VAT is to have the U.S. Treasury mail a “rebate” check to all households to partially or completely offset their consumption tax burden. For example, each household might be mailed a $2,000 rebate check once a year (or, alternatively, a $500 check four times a year) from the U.S. Treasury to offset the first $2,000 of its tax burden from a RST or a VAT. To pay for the rebates, the government would have to set the tax rate higher, so that net tax revenue (i.e., gross tax revenue minus total rebates) remains constant despite the rebate. One issue is whether to vary the amount of the rebate with the number of adults and children in the household. If so, verification of each member (through Social Security numbers) would be needed in the same way it is needed for the federal income tax. Another issue is whether to vary the amount of the rebate with household income. This cannot be done if the RST or the VAT replaces the household income tax, because the government would no longer receive information on each household’s income.2 It can, however, be done if the RST or the VAT supplements the household income tax. The rebate would then be claimed as a refundable tax credit on the annual household income tax, and the amount of the credit could be varied with the household’s income as reported on its income tax return. It would then be possible to phase out the rebate as household income rises, thereby making the RST or VAT, plus rebate, progressive. # THE FLAT TAX AND THE X TAX Another way to reduce the regressivity of a VAT is to modify it so it becomes either the flat tax or the X tax. To obtain the flat tax, start with a VAT on firms and no income tax on households. Then permit firms to deduct wage income (which is not permitted under a standard VAT), but tax households on wage income above an exemption (e.g., $25,000) at the same rate used by the VAT. The name “flat tax” comes from the fact that wage income above the exemption is taxed at a single rate, rather than at graduated rates, and that the single rate is the same as the VAT rate. However, the exemption means that a 0% rate is applied to the first dollars earned up to the exemption (say, $25,000), so there are really two rates under the flat tax: 0% up to the exemption and the “single” rate above the exemption. It is the 0% rate up to the exemption that reduces regressivity. The X tax is the same as the flat tax except that wage income above the exemption is taxed at graduated bracket rates like the current U.S. income tax. The graduated rates achieve progressivity with respect to labor income but not capital income. Like many other tax reformers, advocates of the flat tax support broadening the tax base in order to enable a low tax rate; broadening the base means eliminating most or all household itemized deductions. It is important to understand that base broadening is a completely separate issue. It can be pursued with or without the flat tax or X tax. But why, many citizens ask, is a household taxed only on its labor income under the flat tax or X tax but not on its capital (investment) income? The answer given by advocates is that the flat tax, like a VAT, doesn’t allow the firm to deduct capital income, so capital income is really being taxed at the level of the firm and shouldn’t be taxed again at the level of the household (the wage income of the household is taxed because the firm is given a deduction for wage income). Nevertheless, upon hearing about how2 Under the “fair tax” proposal to replace income and payroll taxes with a national RST, the household rebate would not (and could not) be varied with a household’s income.