\# Public Finance For example, if e = 0.5 and t = 20%, the formula says L/R = 5%: For every $100 of revenue raised, there is an efficiency loss of $5. # Optimal Commodity Taxation Suppose initially that all commodities (goods) are taxed at the same rate under a sales tax, but different goods have different demand elasticities. The efficiency loss of raising a target amount of revenue can be reduced by varying the tax rate across goods—specifically, setting higher tax rates on inelastic goods and lower tax rates on elastic goods. This is called the Ramsey inverse elasticity rule (Ramsey was the economist who discovered it nearly a hundred years ago). But trying to vary tax rates inversely with elasticities has four drawbacks. First, it is not easy to determine each good’s elasticity. Second, it would encourage wasteful lobbying of politicians by producers seeking lower rates for their own goods. Third, it would raise the compliance cost of retailers and the administrative cost of government auditors. Fourth, it would result in a pattern of tax rates many citizens would find unfair, because necessities have inelastic demand and would therefore be taxed at high rates while luxuries have elastic demand and would therefore be taxed at low rates. Because of these drawbacks, it is probably not worth trying to vary tax rates inversely with elasticities. So setting the same tax rate for all goods may not be best in theory but may be sensible in practice. # The Efficiency Loss from a Tax on Wage Income Figure 7.9 shows a market supply-demand diagram for labor. In Figure 7.9, suppose employers pay workers a wage of $16 an hour, equal to the worker’s marginal revenue product of labor (MRPL), which is the amount of additional revenue generated by another hour of work. Each worker pays a tax of $4 and keeps $12. In response to the after-tax wage of $12, workers choose to supply 20,000 hours of labor in a year, because the market consists of 10 workers and each worker chooses to supply 40 hours per week for 50 weeks—hence, 2,000 hours per year. Then it’s wasteful—inefficient—that an additional hour beyond 20,000 was not supplied and used by a firm to produce output. Why? # FIGURE 7.9 The Efficiency Loss from a Wage Tax The efficiency loss equals the triangle’s area.

| $16    | B      | S                    |
| ------ | ------ | -------------------- |
| $12    |        | D                    |
|        | A      |                      |
| 20,000 | 22,000 | Labor (annual hours) |
