\# Chapter 6 Health Insurance

| TABLE 6.4            | Household Income | Tax Credit |
| -------------------- | ---------------- | ---------- |
| Proposed Tax Credit  | $ 0              | $ 8,000    |
| by Household Income  | 50,000           | 6,000      |
| for a Family of Four | 100,000          | 4,000      |
|                      | 150,000          | 2,000      |

The rider who escapes paying for insurance but then receives substantial resources from society upon becoming seriously ill. The Massachusetts plan contains this element. Advocates of a requirement contend that practical methods can be devised to enforce it for most of the population, while critics doubt it can be adequately enforced. The tax credit helps households afford insurance. The tax credit would vary inversely with the household’s income, as shown in Table 6.4 with numbers given just for illustration for a family of four. The credit would be the same whether the household purchased insurance on its own, split the cost of insurance with an employer, or obtained insurance from an employer. A household would claim its health insurance tax credit on its annual income tax return. The credit would be refundable: A low-income family that owed no tax would receive a U.S. Treasury check equal to the credit; a family that owed a tax less than its credit would receive a check equal to the difference. Under the RHI plan, the current tax exclusion would be terminated. Under the exclusion, an employer’s contribution for an employee’s health insurance does not appear on the employee’s annual W-2 form (which shows wage income subject to income tax) and is excluded from that individual’s annual taxable income. Under RHI, any employer contribution for health insurance would be reported on the employees’ W-2 forms as taxable income. Reporting these contributions on W-2 forms and in employees’ taxable income would serve another important goal: It would educate employees about the magnitude of the cost of their health insurance. Currently, many employees are unaware of how much their employer pays for their health insurance. Moreover, many mistakenly assume that their employer bears the cost. W-2 form inclusion would unmask the huge hidden cost of health care for all employees to see. This should have two effects. First, more employees would support their employers’ efforts to find a health insurance policy that limits the premium, even if this involved more patient cost sharing and some selectivity in what is covered. Second, more employees would politically support governmental policies that try to achieve health sector cost containment. One important feature of RHI would provide an incentive for cost containment in the health sector: A household’s tax credit would not vary with the household’s actual insurance premium or actual health expenditure. Thus, an individual who obtains insurance plan A with a premium $1,000 larger than plan B would bear an additional $1,000 burden. Even if the employer purchased the insurance, the premium’s inclusion on the W-2 form and in the employee’s taxable income would serve as a reminder of the individual’s stake in holding down the premium. Fallback or last-resort insurance is essential to ensure that every household can satisfy the individual requirement. The RHI authors recommended that the government contract with private insurers to sell fallback insurance at an affordable premium to all households that want to buy such insurance. An alternative approach would be to have Medicare be the fallback insurer.