\# Chapter 2 Externalities and the Environment price; lowering the price would increase the demand for permits. When the government finds the tentative price where the demand for permits equals its supply—$40 in Figure 2.6—it makes that tentative price the final price and sells the permits. Whatever the initial tentative price in Figure 2.6—whether lower or higher than $40—the government’s final price will end up where demand equals supply (50). What determines the position and slope of the permit demand curve in Figure 2.6? The permit demand curve is simply the horizontal sum of the permit demand curves of each firm. So what determines the position and slope of the permit demand curve of firm L and of firm H? Each firm’s permit demand curve is simply its MAC curve drawn in Figure 2.5. Suppose the tentative price of a permit is $40. Then each firm would find it profitable to do the same thing it would do if it faced a tax of $40. It would reduce its emissions as long as its MAC is less than $40. Hence, firm L would want to emit 10, and firm H, 40. So at a price of $40, L would demand 10 permits, and H, 40 permits, so total demand would be 50 permits. Thus, to obtain the permit demand curve D in Figure 2.6, we simply draw firm L’s MAC and label it DL, draw firm H’s MAC curve and label it DH, and at each price, horizontally add DL plus DH to get D; the D curve is simply the horizontal sum of DL and DH. Note that if the price were $20, DL would be 30 and DH, 45, so D would be 75. For any price less than $40, D would be greater than S (50). Note that if the price were greater than $50, DL would be 0, so D would equal DH. For any price greater than $40, D would be less than S (50). Thus, the government would adjust its tentative price until it arrives at a final price of $40. # Selling Permits versus Levying a Tax So how does this plan differ from levying a tax of $40? At first glance, there appears to be no difference. Each firm’s emissions should be the same whether it must pay a permit price of $40 or pay a tax of $40; hence, in both cases, total emissions should be 50. Moreover, the government should collect the same total revenue—$40 times the number of emissions (50 units), or $2,000. However, there is an important difference. If the tax had been set at $20, then firms would have emitted more than 50 units (in fact 75); and if the tax had been set at $60, then firms would have emitted less than 50 (in fact 35). So under the permit plan, if the government decides to supply 50 permits, then emissions will definitely end up at 50 units, but with the tax, the government can’t be sure that emissions will end up at 50. On the other hand, with the tax, the government can be sure of the MAC each firm will incur for the last unit the firm abates; for example, if the tax is $40, each firm will abate until its MAC rises to $40 and will not abate units with an MAC above $40. Thus, a tax of $40 ensures that abatement will not be undertaken if its cost exceeds $40. By contrast, when the government decides to supply 50 permits, it can’t be sure which permit price will end up making the demand for permits equal to 50, so it is possible that very costly abatement will be undertaken. Therefore, the difference is this: With the tax, the government makes sure that abatement that is too costly will not be undertaken—the tax puts a definite limit on the cost to the economy of abatement, but not a definite limit on emissions. With the permits, the government makes sure that emissions will not exceed the target—the permits put a definite limit on emissions, but not a definite limit on the cost of abatement to the economy. Of course, the tax method need not allow emissions to be permanently excessive; if pollution is excessive in the short run, the tax can be raised. Similarly, the permit