\# Chapter 13 Government Borrowing Debt as a percentage of GDP and the bond interest rate. Let’s follow the story of the interest burden by moving from the left column to the right column in the table. In 1980 net debt as a percentage of GDP was 26% of GDP, and the bond interest rate was 7.3%, so net interest was 1.9% of GDP (26% × 7.3% = 1.9%). With federal revenue 19.0% of GDP, 10% of federal revenue was needed to pay interest to the holders of Treasury debt (1.9%/19.0% = 10%), leaving 90% available to finance other federal programs. By contrast, in 1993 net debt as a percentage of GDP peaked at 49%, and the bond interest rate was 6.1%, so net interest was 3.0% of GDP (49% × 6.1% = 3.0%). With federal revenue 17.5% of GDP, 17% of federal revenue was needed to pay interest to the holders of Treasury debt (3.0%/17.5% = 17%), leaving 83% available to finance federal programs. Quite an improvement had been achieved by 2001. In that year, net debt as a percentage of GDP was 33% of GDP, and the bond interest rate was 6.0%, so net interest was 2.0% of GDP (33% × 6.0% = 2.0%). With federal revenue 19.8% of GDP, 10% of federal revenue was needed to pay interest to the holders of Treasury debt (2.0%/19.8% = 10%), leaving 90% available to finance other federal programs. To bring things up to date, in 2007 net debt as a percentage of GDP was a few points higher, 37%, than in 2001 (33%), but the bond interest was much lower, 4.6% (instead of 6.0%), so net interest was 1.7% of GDP (37% × 4.6% = 1.7%). With federal revenue 18.8% of GDP, 9% of federal revenue was needed to pay interest to the holders of Treasury debt (1.7%/18.8% = 9%), leaving 91% available to finance federal programs. # The Deficit, Debt, and Interest as a Percentage of GDP Suppose the government runs a deficit equal to 5% of GDP every year (e.g., suppose that every year federal spending including interest payments to bondholders is 25% of GDP and federal tax revenue is 20% of GDP). What would happen to debt as a percentage of GDP (b) in the long run? It turns out that the answer is given by the simple formula: b\* = f/g where b\* = debt as a percentage of GDP in the long run, f = the deficit as a percentage of GDP, g = the growth rate of nominal GDP. For example, if f = 5% and g = 5%, then in the long run, debt as a percentage of GDP b\* would eventually become 100%. Consider an example shown in Table 13.3, for which all money amounts are in the billions. Suppose that in year 0 debt is $5,000 and nominal GDP is $10,000, so debt as a percentage of GDP (b) is 50.0%. Assume that every year the deficit as a percentage of GDP (f) is 5% and the growth rate of nominal GDP (g) is 5%. Then in year 0 the deficit is $500.00, so in year 1 debt is $5,500; in year 1 nominal GDP is $10,500, so debt as a percentage of GDP (b) is 52.4%; and so on. Each year debt as a percentage of GDP (b) would rise until it eventually gets very close to but never exceeds 100%—we say that in the long run b “becomes” 100%. Now let’s look at what happens to interest paid to bondholders. Assume that every year the interest rate on government bonds (r) is 5%. Then in year 0 interest is $250. 4 The derivation of the formula is given in the appendix to this chapter.