\# Chapter 12 Low–Income Assistance For example, any household could claim a refundable credit equal to X% of the premium up to a $10,000 expenditure where X would decline as income rises. A refundable tax credit has two advantages over a direct government program. First, it can vary the amount of assistance with family income because income is reported on the tax return. A direct government program cannot vary assistance with family income unless it asks families to report their income, duplicating the income tax return process. Second, the family uses the same process (the 1040 income tax return) and bureaucracy (the IRS) each year, regardless of how its income fluctuates: One year its income is low, so it files its return and receives a large refundable tax credit; the next year its income is high, so it files its return and receives a small refundable tax credit. One disadvantage is that the IRS provides less monitoring and supervision than most direct government programs. # UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE An employed individual who is paid an adequate wage generally does not need assistance. However, things can go wrong. The individual can lose her job, suffer an injury on the job, or become disabled. The typical individual would be willing to pay for insurance against these adverse events—a guarantee of some financial assistance should the event occur. Insurance has developed for each of these contingencies: unemployment insurance, workers’ compensation, and disability insurance. These insurance programs are similar to old age insurance (i.e., Social Security), which we examined in Chapter 5, and health insurance, which we examined in Chapter 6—they provide benefits contingent on an adverse event. As in the case of old age insurance or health insurance, it is not immediately obvious whether these insurance programs should be provided by government or by private insurance companies, whether they should be voluntary or required, and whether the appropriate level of government is federal or state. In the United States, unemployment insurance and disability insurance are provided by the government. States require private firms to buy workers’ compensation—job injury insurance—from private insurance companies (just as many firms voluntarily buy health insurance for their employees). Unemployment insurance is mandated by the federal government but administered by the states; it was originally enacted as part of the Social Security Act of 1935 to give cash benefits to workers laid off from their jobs. Disability insurance is a federal program introduced in 1957 to assist people with career-ending disabilities; it is part of the Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) program along with Social Security. The remainder of this section focuses on unemployment insurance. When a person is laid off from her job, she usually qualifies for unemployment compensation from the government and will be paid periodic cash benefits for up to 26 weeks (and an additional 13 weeks if the economy is in recession); in a normal economy, most workers collect for less than 10 weeks before finding a new job. Because each state administers its own unemployment insurance program under federal regulations originally established in the Social Security Act of 1935, provisions vary across states. An unemployed worker’s benefit depends on her recent wage income; on average the benefit is roughly 40% of recent wage income—this “replacement rate” is generally higher than 40% for low-income workers and lower than 40% for high-income workers. Unemployment benefits are included in the adjusted gross income when the household computes its federal income tax. The unemployment insurance program is financed