\# 192 Public Finance (completely inelastic): When the after-tax wage rises, there is no change in the hours of labor the person chooses to supply. It is useful to divide the move from A to B in Figure 7A.1(a) into two parts: A move from A to point s, and a move from s to B. The move from A to s is called the substitution effect, and the move from s to B is called the income effect. Let’s explain each effect in turn. When the after-tax wage increases (from $12 to $15), each hour of leisure has a “price” of $15 instead of $12—the person must give up $15 instead of $12 to enjoy an hour of leisure. This higher price of leisure in itself gives the person an incentive to substitute other goods for leisure by working more. This is called the substitution effect. In the diagram, the move from point A to point s is the substitution effect. At point A, the slope of the indifference curve (strictly speaking, the slope of a tangent to the indifference curve) is –$12, the slope of the budget line when the after-tax wage is $12. From point A, move northwest along that indifference curve until its slope reaches –$15 at point s. Clearly, the substitution effect in itself would reduce leisure—as drawn, by 200 hours annually from 6,760 to 6,560—hence, it would increase labor supply by 200 hours annually, from 2,000 to 2,200. Note an important point: The substitution effect holds the person’s utility constant because the person moves along the original indifference curve. Another way to describe the substitution effect—the move from A to s—is to imagine that when the after-tax wage rises from $12 to $15, instead of letting the person move to point B and achieve a higher utility, we “compensate” for this utility-raising effect by simultaneously taking away enough income from the person to shift his budget line parallel southwest from B until it is tangent to the original indifference curve at point s, so that instead of moving from A to B, he only moves from A to s. The substitution effect is sometimes called the compensated effect of a price increase. In Figure 7A.1(b), the move from A to s is plotted in the labor supply diagram. When the after-tax wage rises from $12 to $15 but we simultaneously compensate for this by taking away enough income to keep the person on the original indifference curve (thereby holding his utility constant), labor supply would increase by 200 hours annually from 2,000 to 2,200 (corresponding to the reduction of leisure from 6,760 to 6,560). We call the curve joining points A and s the compensated labor supply curve (Scomp). As the after-tax wage rises along the compensated labor supply curve, the person’s utility remains constant because of the simultaneous removal of income. When the after-tax wage rises from $12 to $15, the person doesn’t actually move from point A to point s; he moves from point A to point B. Why does he end up at B instead of s? Because the rise in the after-tax wage makes the person richer and enables him to reach a higher indifference curve and a higher utility. It is as though, starting from point s with the slope of –$15, the person was given income that moves his budget line parallel in a northeast direction until it reaches point B. The move from s to B is called the income effect. Note that the move from s to B in itself would increase leisure (assuming leisure is a normal good)—as drawn, by 200 hours annually from 6,560 to 6,760. The income effect raises the person’s utility because it moves the person to a higher indifference curve. For this person, it just happens that the income and substitution effects have exactly the same magnitude (200) and exactly offset each other, so the person keeps leisure constant (6,760) by moving from A to B when the after-tax wage rises. Consider another person for whom point B would be northwest (instead of directly north) of point A (the substitution effect to the left would be larger than the income effect to the right). That person would decrease leisure moving from A to B (hence,