\# Chapter 7 Tax Incidence and Inefficiency wage increase. This decrease in income would cause the worker to choose less leisure, hence more work, so the worker would choose a higher labor supply. This curve, which is therefore flatter than the ordinary supply curve, is called the compensated labor supply curve. Along the compensated supply curve, workers’ utility stays constant. Thus it is the compensated supply curve (not the ordinary labor supply curve) that should be used to construct the BAD triangle that measures the efficiency loss from the tax. # THE EFFICIENCY LOSS FROM A TAX ON CAPITAL INCOME In the discussion of Figure 7.10 it was noted in a footnote that the S curve in the diagram used to construct the BAD triangle is the compensated supply curve, not the ordinary supply curve. Here we explain why. Starting from $100,000 dollars (the quantity of saving resulting from the tax), the after-tax interest rate a saver would need to be paid to be willing to save the $100,001st dollar is 3%, while the rate of return of a dollar invested in a machine is 5%. If the $100,001st dollar is saved and invested in a machine, it would be possible to compensate the saver 3%, so that the saver’s utility stays constant, and then distribute the rest of the surplus return (2%) to other people, making them better off; hence, the net gain in welfare from the $100,001st dollar saved would be 2%. Then do the same thing for the $100,002nd dollar, distributing the surplus which is now slightly less than 2% to other people; and so on, stopping at intersection point D ($120,000). During this hypothetical process, savers would be compensated so that their utility stays constant. Thus, the curve we need to construct the BAD triangle is a curve along which the utility of savers remains constant. The curve looks like a supply curve, but utility does not stay constant along an ordinary supply curve. An ordinary supply curve shows how a person’s saving supply increases as the after-tax interest rate rises—but as the saver climbs up an ordinary supply curve, the saver’s utility increases. To keep the saver’s utility constant as the after-tax interest rate rises, we must compensate for the interest rate increase by taking away just enough income from the saver, so that the saver’s utility stays constant despite the interest rate increase. This decrease in income would cause the person to choose less present consumption, hence more saving, so the person would choose a higher saving supply than without this decrease in income. This curve, which is therefore flatter than the ordinary supply curve, is called the compensated saving supply curve. Along the compensated supply curve, savers’ utility stays constant. Thus it is the compensated supply curve (not the ordinary saver supply curve) that should be used to construct the BAD triangle that measures the efficiency loss from the tax.