\# 24 Public Finance # Key Terms

| free market                   | 2 | negative externality    | 8  | Medicaid                        | 16 |
| ----------------------------- | - | ----------------------- | -- | ------------------------------- | -- |
| efficiency                    | 2 | positive externality    | 9  | Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) | 16 |
| productive efficiency         | 2 | corrective tax          | 10 | unemployment compensation       | 16 |
| allocative efficiency         | 2 | corrective subsidy      | 10 | disability insurance            | 16 |
| positive economics            | 3 | free-rider problem      | 10 | Social Security                 | 12 |
| normative economics           | 3 | public good             | 11 | Medicare                        | 13 |
| marginal cost (MC)            | 3 | social insurance        | 11 | progressive tax                 | 14 |
| marginal benefit (MB)         | 3 | workers’ compensation   | 16 | proportional tax                | 14 |
| marginal social cost (MSC)    | 4 | regressive tax          | 14 | federal deficit                 | 19 |
| marginal social benefit (MSB) | 4 | consumption externality | 15 | federal debt                    | 20 |
| inefficiency                  | 4 |                         |    |                                 |    |

\# Questions

1. Using a diagram, explain why a tax on producers of good X causes inefficiency. Show the dollar amount of the inefficiency.
2. Using a diagram, explain why a tax on consumers of good X causes inefficiency. Show the dollar amount of the inefficiency.
3. Using a diagram, explain why a subsidy to producers of good X causes inefficiency. Show the dollar amount of the inefficiency.
4. Using a diagram, explain why a subsidy to consumers of good X causes inefficiency. Show the dollar amount of the inefficiency.
5. Suppose the production of a good X damages the environment (there is a negative externality). Using a diagram, show the dollar amount of inefficiency generated by the free market. What policy can correct the market to eliminate the inefficiency?
6. Suppose the consumption of a good M benefits not only the people who consume it but also the people who don’t consume it (there is a positive externality). Using a diagram, show the dollar amount of inefficiency generated by the free market. What policy can correct the market to eliminate the inefficiency?
7. Explain the free-rider problem for military protection against foreign attack.
8. Give arguments against and for some government role concerning old age insurance.
9. Give arguments against and for some government role concerning health insurance.
10. Explain how a progressive income tax reduces inequality but causes some inefficiency.
11. Assign the percentages 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, and 50% to the following: U.S. taxes, U.S. federal taxes, U.S. state and local taxes, OECD taxes, and Scandinavian taxes.
12. What does the CBO project will happen to “The Big Three” from 2010 to 2040?
13. Go online and find several interesting numerical percentages (not dollar amounts)—percentages of GDP or percentages of total spending—about components of U.S federal, state, and local spending. Begin by checking out national defense, Medicaid (federal versus state), and education (federal versus state versus local). Why do you think these percentages are interesting or surprising?