\# Chapter 11 Education Certainly caused many schools to make efforts to improve student performance on the annual standardized tests. However, critics contend that the focus on standardized test scores has negative effects. They argue that too much time is spent “teaching to the tests” at the expense of learning, creative problem solving, and imaginative thinking which are harder to measure but more important to a child’s long-run academic development. Defenders of NCLB reply that without standardized tests, accountability, and penalties for the school and the school board, too many students will continue to fail to learn the most important basic skills. # HIGHER EDUCATION Most people agree that all children should attend school through high school. Once high school has been completed, many graduates are physically, mentally, and emotionally ready to take a full-time job. A hundred years ago, most graduates did start working full time at this stage. Yet today most graduates enroll in higher education instead of going to work. Is this a good thing? # The Costs and Benefits of Higher Education Attending college is costly. There are two large costs. The first is forgone earnings—the wage income that the student could have earned if he were not attending college. A college student does not work at all or only works part time, so he contributes less output to the economy and earns correspondingly less income. If a high school graduate could earn $20,000 a year for the next four years but instead goes to college, his forgone earnings are $80,000. The second cost is tuition. Colleges incur costs (e.g., teachers’ salaries and facilities, etc.) to provide education to students, and the costs are covered partly or fully by charging tuition. If tuition is $15,000 a year for four years, the total tuition cost is $60,000. The student in this example faces a cost of $35,000 per year ($20,000 forgone earnings + $15,000 tuition) or $140,000 to attend college over four years—$80,000 in forgone earnings and $60,000 in tuition. These costs are shown in Figure 11.2. # FIGURE 11.2 College The Benefits and Costs of Higher Education

| B = Benefits         |   |
| -------------------- | - |
| F = Forgone earnings |   |
| T = Tuition          |   |
| Income               |   |
| Age                  |   |
